URL: https://www.britannica.com/biography/Leonardo-da-Vinci
Title: Leonardo da Vinci | Biography, Art, Paintings, Mona Lisa, Drawings ...
Content:
Leonardo da Vinci | Biography, Art, Paintings, Mona Lisa, Drawings, Inventions, Achievements, & Facts | Britannica Search Britannica Click here to search Search Britannica Click here to search Subscribe Subscribe Login Home Games & Quizzes History & Society Science & Tech Biographies Animals & Nature Geography & Travel Arts & Culture Money Videos On This Day One Good Fact Dictionary New Articles History & Society Lifestyles & Social Issues Philosophy & Religion Politics, Law & Government World H
istory & Society Lifestyles & Social Issues Philosophy & Religion Politics, Law & Government World History Science & Tech Health & Medicine Science Technology Biographies Browse Biographies Animals & Nature Birds, Reptiles & Other Vertebrates Bugs, Mollusks & Other Invertebrates Environment Fossils & Geologic Time Mammals Plants Geography & Travel Geography & Travel Arts & Culture Entertainment & Pop Culture Literature Sports & Recreation Visual Arts Companions Demystified Image Galleries Infogr
Pop Culture Literature Sports & Recreation Visual Arts Companions Demystified Image Galleries Infographics Lists Podcasts Spotlights Summaries The Forum Top Questions #WTFact 100 Women Britannica Kids Saving Earth Space Next 50 Student Center Home Games & Quizzes History & Society Science & Tech Biographies Animals & Nature Geography & Travel Arts & Culture Money Videos Leonardo da Vinci Table of Contents Introduction & Top Questions Life and works Early period: Florence First Milanese period (1
Contents Introduction & Top Questions Life and works Early period: Florence First Milanese period (1482–99) Second Florentine period (1500–08) Second Milanese period (1508–13) Last years (1513–19) Art and accomplishment Painting and drawing Last Supper Art and science: the notebooks The Mona Lisa and other works Later painting and drawing Sculpture Architecture Science Science of painting Anatomical studies and drawings Mechanics and cosmology Leonardo as artist-scientist Quotes References & Edi
al studies and drawings Mechanics and cosmology Leonardo as artist-scientist Quotes References & Edit History Quick Facts & Related Topics Images & Videos For Students Leonardo da Vinci Timeline Leonardo da Vinci’s Achievements Quizzes Ultimate Art Quiz Artists, Painters, & Architects Inventors and Inventions Architecture: The Built World Name That Artist Related Questions What is Leonardo da Vinci best known for? How many Leonardo da Vinci paintings are there? What was Leonardo da Vinci’s perso
i best known for? How many Leonardo da Vinci paintings are there? What was Leonardo da Vinci’s personality like? What was Leonardo da Vinci’s family like? Who was Leonardo apprenticed to? Read Next 29 Paintings You Can Visit Only at the Louvre Why Is the Mona Lisa So Famous? 8 of History’s Most Famous Vegetarians 10 Famous Artworks by Leonardo da Vinci 25 Famous Paintings to See the Next Time You’re in Florence Discover 5 Remarkably Close U.S. Presidential Elections When Does Summer Start? 12 Gr
re in Florence Discover 5 Remarkably Close U.S. Presidential Elections When Does Summer Start? 12 Greek Gods and Goddesses 9 of the World’s Deadliest Snakes How Fast Is the World’s Fastest Human? Secret Service Code Names of 11 U.S. Presidents 11 Memorable Quotes from U.S. Presidential Debates Contents Visual Arts Painting Painters Leonardo da Vinci Italian artist, engineer, and scientist Actions Cite verified Cite While every effort has been made to follow citation style rules, there may be som
Cite verified Cite While every effort has been made to follow citation style rules, there may be some discrepancies.
			Please refer to the appropriate style manual or other sources if you have any questions. Select Citation Style MLA APA Chicago Manual of Style Copy Citation Share Share Share to social media Facebook X URL https://www.britannica.com/biography/Leonardo-da-Vinci Give Feedback External Websites Feedback Corrections? Updates? Omissions? Let us know if you have suggestions to improv
nal Websites Feedback Corrections? Updates? Omissions? Let us know if you have suggestions to improve this article (requires login). Feedback Type Select a type (Required) Factual Correction Spelling/Grammar Correction Link Correction Additional Information Other Your Feedback Submit Feedback Thank you for your feedback Our editors will review what you’ve submitted and determine whether to revise the article. External Websites Social Studies for Kids - Biography of Leonardo da Vinci Humanities L
the article. External Websites Social Studies for Kids - Biography of Leonardo da Vinci Humanities LibreTexts - Leonardo da Vinci Art in Context - Leonardo da Vinci - The Life and Artworks of Leonardo da Vinci Art Encyclopedia - Biography of Leonardo Da Vinci The Met - Biography of Leonardo da Vinci University of California Museum of Paleontology - Biography of Leonardo da Vinci The Art Story - Leonardo da Vinci Web Gallery of Art - Biography of Leonardo da Vinci Britannica Websites Articles fro
onardo da Vinci Web Gallery of Art - Biography of Leonardo da Vinci Britannica Websites Articles from Britannica Encyclopedias for elementary and high school students. Leonardo da Vinci - Children's Encyclopedia (Ages 8-11) Leonardo da Vinci - Student Encyclopedia (Ages 11 and up) Print print Print Please select which sections you would like to print: Table Of Contents Cite verified Cite While every effort has been made to follow citation style rules, there may be some discrepancies.
			Please r
ry effort has been made to follow citation style rules, there may be some discrepancies.
			Please refer to the appropriate style manual or other sources if you have any questions. Select Citation Style MLA APA Chicago Manual of Style Copy Citation Share Share Share to social media Facebook X URL https://www.britannica.com/biography/Leonardo-da-Vinci Feedback External Websites Feedback Corrections? Updates? Omissions? Let us know if you have suggestions to improve this article (requires login). 
? Updates? Omissions? Let us know if you have suggestions to improve this article (requires login). Feedback Type Select a type (Required) Factual Correction Spelling/Grammar Correction Link Correction Additional Information Other Your Feedback Submit Feedback Thank you for your feedback Our editors will review what you’ve submitted and determine whether to revise the article. External Websites Social Studies for Kids - Biography of Leonardo da Vinci Humanities LibreTexts - Leonardo da Vinci Art
cial Studies for Kids - Biography of Leonardo da Vinci Humanities LibreTexts - Leonardo da Vinci Art in Context - Leonardo da Vinci - The Life and Artworks of Leonardo da Vinci Art Encyclopedia - Biography of Leonardo Da Vinci The Met - Biography of Leonardo da Vinci University of California Museum of Paleontology - Biography of Leonardo da Vinci The Art Story - Leonardo da Vinci Web Gallery of Art - Biography of Leonardo da Vinci Britannica Websites Articles from Britannica Encyclopedias for el
t - Biography of Leonardo da Vinci Britannica Websites Articles from Britannica Encyclopedias for elementary and high school students. Leonardo da Vinci - Children's Encyclopedia (Ages 8-11) Leonardo da Vinci - Student Encyclopedia (Ages 11 and up) Written by Ludwig Heinrich Heydenreich Director, Central Institute for the History of Art, Munich, 1947–70. Author of Leonardo da Vinci; Leonardo architetto. Ludwig Heinrich Heydenreich Fact-checked by The Editors of Encyclopaedia Britannica Encyclopa
tetto. Ludwig Heinrich Heydenreich Fact-checked by The Editors of Encyclopaedia Britannica Encyclopaedia Britannica's editors oversee subject areas in which they have extensive knowledge, whether from years of experience gained by working on that content or via study for an advanced degree. They write new content and verify and edit content received from contributors. The Editors of Encyclopaedia Britannica Last Updated: Jun 20, 2024 • Article History Table of Contents Leonardo da Vinci: self-po
Britannica Last Updated: Jun 20, 2024 • Article History Table of Contents Leonardo da Vinci: self-portrait See all media Italian: “Leonardo from Vinci” (Show more) Born: April 15, 1452, Anchiano, near Vinci, Republic of Florence [Italy] (Show more) Died: May 2, 1519, Cloux [now Clos-Lucé], France (aged  67) (Show more) Notable Works: “Battle of Anghiari” “Last Supper” “Leda” “Mona Lisa” “Portrait of Ginevra de’ Benci” “St. Jerome” “The Benois Madonna” “The Virgin of the Rocks” “Treatise on Paint
of Ginevra de’ Benci” “St. Jerome” “The Benois Madonna” “The Virgin of the Rocks” “Treatise on Painting” “Virgin and Child with St. Anne” (Show more) Movement / Style: Early Renaissance Renaissance (Show more) Subjects Of Study: painting perspective anatomy cosmology mechanics (Show more) See all related content → Top Questions What is Leonardo da Vinci best known for? Leonardo da Vinci was an artist and engineer who is best known for his paintings, notably the Mona Lisa (c. 1503–19) and the Las
ist and engineer who is best known for his paintings, notably the Mona Lisa (c. 1503–19) and the Last Supper (1495–98). His drawing of the Vitruvian Man (c. 1490) has also become a cultural icon. Leonardo is sometimes credited as the inventor of the tank, helicopter, parachute, and flying machine, among other vehicles and devices, but later scholarship has disputed such claims. Nonetheless, Leonardo’s notebooks reveal a sharp intellect, and his contributions to art, including methods of represen
do’s notebooks reveal a sharp intellect, and his contributions to art, including methods of representing space, three-dimensional objects, and the human figure, cannot be overstated. Read more below: Art and accomplishment: Leonardo as artist-scientist How many Leonardo da Vinci paintings are there? Leonardo da Vinci’s total output in painting is really rather small; there are less than 20 surviving paintings that can be definitely attributed to him, and several of them are unfinished. Two of hi
ng paintings that can be definitely attributed to him, and several of them are unfinished. Two of his most important works—the Battle of Anghiari and the Leda , neither of them completed—have survived only in copies. Read more below: Art and accomplishment: Painting and drawing 10 Famous Artworks by Leonardo da Vinci Find out which of Leonardo da Vinci’s surviving artworks are the most famous. What was Leonardo da Vinci’s personality like? Leonardo da Vinci was described as having a gracious but
t was Leonardo da Vinci’s personality like? Leonardo da Vinci was described as having a gracious but reserved personality and an elegant bearing. He was known to be fastidious in personal care, keeping a beard neat and trim in later age, and to dress in colorful clothing in styles that dismissed current customs. The 16th-century writer Giorgio Vasari indicated that Leonardo cared little for money but was very generous toward his friends and assistants. He had an exceedingly inquisitive mind and 
but was very generous toward his friends and assistants. He had an exceedingly inquisitive mind and made strenuous efforts to become erudite in languages, natural science, mathematics, philosophy, and history, among other subjects. The writings in his notebooks suggest that he may have been a vegetarian, and there is also some speculation that he may have been gay. What was Leonardo da Vinci’s family like? Leonardo da Vinci’s parents were unmarried at the time of his birth near a small village n
ily like? Leonardo da Vinci’s parents were unmarried at the time of his birth near a small village named Vinci in Tuscany . His father, Ser Piero, was a Florentine notary and landlord, and his mother, Caterina, was a young peasant woman who shortly thereafter married an artisan. Leonardo grew up on his father’s family’s estate, where he was treated as a “legitimate” son and received the usual elementary education of the day: reading, writing, and arithmetic. Leonardo never married, but he had ma
entary education of the day: reading, writing, and arithmetic. Leonardo never married, but he had many close relationships with other artists and intellectuals as well as with his assistants. Read more below: Life and works Who was Leonardo apprenticed to? When Leonardo was about 15, his father, who enjoyed a high reputation in the Florentine community, apprenticed him to artist Andrea del Verrocchio . In Verrocchio’s renowned workshop Leonardo received multifaceted training that included painti
hio . In Verrocchio’s renowned workshop Leonardo received multifaceted training that included painting and sculpture as well as the technical-mechanical arts. He also worked in the next-door workshop of artist Antonio del Pollaiuolo , a sculptor, painter, engraver, and goldsmith, who frequently worked with his brother, Piero . In 1472 Leonardo was accepted into the painters’ guild of Florence , but he remained in his teacher’s workshop for five more years, after which time he worked independentl
t he remained in his teacher’s workshop for five more years, after which time he worked independently in Florence until 1481. Read more below: Life and works Pollaiuolo brothers Read more about the Renaissance artist Antonio del Pollaiuolo and his brother Piero, in whose workshop Leonardo da Vinci worked as a young apprentice. Recent News June 19, 2024, 9:33 PM ET (The Hindu) Julianne Moore to play art restorer in TV series based on documentary ‘The Lost Leonardo’ Summarize This Article Summariz
y art restorer in TV series based on documentary ‘The Lost Leonardo’ Summarize This Article Summarize BETA ? Trusted Britannica articles, summarized using artificial intelligence, to provide a quicker and simpler reading experience. This is a beta feature. Please verify important information in our full article. This summary was created from our Britannica article using AI. Please verify important information in our full article. Summarize This Article Leonardo da Vinci (born April 15, 1452, Anc
 information in our full article. Summarize This Article Leonardo da Vinci (born April 15, 1452, Anchiano, near Vinci, Republic of Florence [Italy]—died May 2, 1519, Cloux [now Clos-Lucé], France) was an Italian painter, draftsman, sculptor, architect, and engineer whose skill and intelligence, perhaps more than that of any other figure, epitomized the Renaissance humanist ideal. His Last Supper (1495–98) and Mona Lisa (c. 1503–19) are among the most widely popular and influential paintings of t
1495–98) and Mona Lisa (c. 1503–19) are among the most widely popular and influential paintings of the Renaissance . His notebooks reveal a spirit of scientific inquiry and a mechanical inventiveness that were centuries ahead of their time. Explore the life of Italian painter, architect, engineer, and humanist Leonardo da Vinci This video examines the life and works of the Renaissance artist and inventor Leonardo da Vinci. Made in 1957, it is a production of the Encyclopædia Britannica Education
nventor Leonardo da Vinci. Made in 1957, it is a production of the Encyclopædia Britannica Educational Corporation. (more) See all videos for this article The unique fame that Leonardo enjoyed in his lifetime and that, filtered by historical criticism , has remained undimmed to the present day rests largely on his unlimited desire for knowledge, which guided all his thinking and behaviour. An artist by disposition and endowment, he considered his eyes to be his main avenue to knowledge; to Leona
st by disposition and endowment, he considered his eyes to be his main avenue to knowledge; to Leonardo, sight was man’s highest sense because it alone conveyed the facts of experience immediately, correctly, and with certainty. Hence, every phenomenon perceived became an object of knowledge, and saper vedere (“knowing how to see”) became the great theme of his studies. He applied his creativity to every realm in which graphic representation is used: he was a painter, sculptor, architect, and en
o every realm in which graphic representation is used: he was a painter, sculptor, architect, and engineer. But he went even beyond that. He used his superb intellect, unusual powers of observation, and mastery of the art of drawing to study nature itself, a line of inquiry that allowed his dual pursuits of art and science to flourish. Life and works Early period: Florence Leonardo’s parents were unmarried at the time of his birth. His father, Ser Piero, was a Florentine notary and landlord, and
unmarried at the time of his birth. His father, Ser Piero, was a Florentine notary and landlord, and his mother, Caterina, was a young peasant woman who shortly thereafter married an artisan. Leonardo grew up on his father’s family’s estate, where he was treated as a “legitimate” son and received the usual elementary education of that day: reading, writing , and arithmetic. Leonardo did not seriously study Latin , the key language of traditional learning, until much later, when he acquired a wor
sly study Latin , the key language of traditional learning, until much later, when he acquired a working knowledge of it on his own. He also did not apply himself to higher mathematics —advanced geometry and arithmetic—until he was 30 years old, when he began to study it with diligent tenacity. Leonardo’s artistic inclinations must have appeared early. When he was about 15, his father, who enjoyed a high reputation in the Florence community , apprenticed him to artist Andrea del Verrocchio . In 
 a high reputation in the Florence community , apprenticed him to artist Andrea del Verrocchio . In Verrocchio’s renowned workshop Leonardo received a multifaceted training that included painting and sculpture as well as the technical-mechanical arts. He also worked in the next-door workshop of artist Antonio Pollaiuolo . In 1472 Leonardo was accepted into the painters’ guild of Florence, but he remained in his teacher’s workshop for five more years, after which time he worked independently in F
emained in his teacher’s workshop for five more years, after which time he worked independently in Florence until 1481. There are a great many superb extant pen and pencil drawings from this period, including many technical sketches—for example, pumps, military weapons, mechanical apparatus—that offer evidence of Leonardo’s interest in and knowledge of technical matters even at the outset of his career. Britannica Quiz Quiz: Ancient Illustrations Showing Us the Way First Milanese period (1482–99
areer. Britannica Quiz Quiz: Ancient Illustrations Showing Us the Way First Milanese period (1482–99) In 1482 Leonardo moved to Milan to work in the service of the city’s duke—a surprising step when one realizes that the 30-year-old artist had just received his first substantial commissions from his native city of Florence: the unfinished panel painting Adoration of the Magi for the monastery of San Donato a Scopeto and an altar painting for the St. Bernard Chapel in the Palazzo della Signoria, 
an Donato a Scopeto and an altar painting for the St. Bernard Chapel in the Palazzo della Signoria, which was never begun. That he gave up both projects seems to indicate that he had deeper reasons for leaving Florence. It may have been that the rather sophisticated spirit of Neoplatonism prevailing in the Florence of the Medici went against the grain of Leonardo’s experience-oriented mind and that the more strict, academic atmosphere of Milan attracted him. Moreover, he was no doubt enticed by 
t the more strict, academic atmosphere of Milan attracted him. Moreover, he was no doubt enticed by Duke Ludovico Sforza ’s brilliant court and the meaningful projects awaiting him there. Leonardo da Vinci: Lady with an Ermine Lady with an Ermine , oil on panel by Leonardo da Vinci, c. 1489–91; in the National Museum, Kraków, Poland. (more) Leonardo spent 17 years in Milan, until Ludovico’s fall from power in 1499. He was listed in the register of the royal household as pictor et ingeniarius duc
rom power in 1499. He was listed in the register of the royal household as pictor et ingeniarius ducalis (“painter and engineer of the duke”). Leonardo’s gracious but reserved personality and elegant bearing were well-received in court circles. Highly esteemed, he was constantly kept busy as a painter and sculptor and as a designer of court festivals. He was also frequently consulted as a technical adviser in the fields of architecture , fortifications, and military matters, and he served as a h
l adviser in the fields of architecture , fortifications, and military matters, and he served as a hydraulic and mechanical engineer. As he would throughout his life, Leonardo set boundless goals for himself; if one traces the outlines of his work for this period, or for his life as a whole, one is tempted to call it a grandiose “unfinished symphony.” Get a Britannica Premium subscription and gain access to exclusive content. Subscribe Now As a painter, Leonardo completed six works in the 17 yea
 access to exclusive content. Subscribe Now As a painter, Leonardo completed six works in the 17 years in Milan. (According to contemporary sources, Leonardo was commissioned to create three more pictures, but these works have since disappeared or were never done.) From about 1483 to 1486, he worked on the altar painting The Virgin of the Rocks , a project that led to 10 years of litigation between the Confraternity of the Immaculate Conception , which commissioned it, and Leonardo; for uncertai
n the Confraternity of the Immaculate Conception , which commissioned it, and Leonardo; for uncertain purposes, this legal dispute led Leonardo to create another version of the work in about 1508. During this first Milanese period he also made one of his most famous works, the monumental wall painting Last Supper (1495–98) in the refectory of the monastery of Santa Maria delle Grazie (for more analysis of this work, see below Last Supper ). Also of note is the decorative ceiling painting (1498) 
lysis of this work, see below Last Supper ). Also of note is the decorative ceiling painting (1498) he made for the Sala delle Asse in the Milan Castello Sforzesco . During this period Leonardo worked on a grandiose sculptural project that seems to have been the real reason he was invited to Milan: a monumental equestrian statue in bronze to be erected in honour of Francesco Sforza , the founder of the Sforza dynasty . Leonardo devoted 12 years—with interruptions—to this task. In 1493 the clay m
f the Sforza dynasty . Leonardo devoted 12 years—with interruptions—to this task. In 1493 the clay model of the horse was put on public display on the occasion of the marriage of Emperor Maximilian to Bianca Maria Sforza, and preparations were made to cast the colossal figure, which was to be 16 feet (5 metres) high. But, because of the imminent danger of war, the metal, ready to be poured, was used to make cannons instead, causing the project to come to a halt. Ludovico’s fall in 1499 sealed th
ed to make cannons instead, causing the project to come to a halt. Ludovico’s fall in 1499 sealed the fate of this abortive undertaking, which was perhaps the grandest concept of a monument in the 15th century. The ensuing war left the clay model a heap of ruins. As a master artist, Leonardo maintained an extensive workshop in Milan, employing apprentices and students. Among Leonardo’s pupils at this time were Giovanni Antonio Boltraffio, Ambrogio de Predis, Bernardino de’ Conti, Francesco Napol
his time were Giovanni Antonio Boltraffio, Ambrogio de Predis, Bernardino de’ Conti, Francesco Napoletano, Andrea Solari , Marco d’Oggiono, and Salai. The role of most of these associates is unclear, leading to the question of Leonardo’s so-called apocryphal works, on which the master collaborated with his assistants. Scholars have been unable to agree in their attributions of these works.
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Leonardo_da_Vinci
Title: Leonardo da Vinci - Wikipedia
Content:
Leonardo da Vinci - Wikipedia Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Appearance Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 1.1 Early life (1452–1472)
ntents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 1.1 Early life (1452–1472) 1.1.1 Birth and background 1.1.2 Verrocchio's workshop 1.2 First Florentine period (1472–c. 1482) 1.3 First Milanese period (c. 1482–1499) 1.4 Second Florentine period (1500–1508) 1.5 Second Milanese period (1508–1513) 1.6 Rome and France (1513–1519) 1.6.1 Death 2 Personal life 3 Paintings Toggle Paintings subsection 3.1 Early works 3.2 Paintings of the 1480s 3.3 Paintings of the 1490s 3.4 Painti
aintings subsection 3.1 Early works 3.2 Paintings of the 1480s 3.3 Paintings of the 1490s 3.4 Paintings of the 1500s 4 Drawings 5 Journals and notes 6 Science and inventions Toggle Science and inventions subsection 6.1 Anatomy and physiology 6.2 Engineering and inventions 7 Legacy 8 Location of remains 9 Notes 10 References Toggle References subsection 10.1 Citations 10.2 Works cited 10.2.1 Early 10.2.2 Modern 11 Further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Leonardo da Vinci 23
10.2.2 Modern 11 Further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Leonardo da Vinci 234 languages Адыгэбзэ Afrikaans Alemannisch Алтай тил አማርኛ अंगिका Аԥсшәа العربية Aragonés ܐܪܡܝܐ Արեւմտահայերէն Armãneashti অসমীয়া Asturianu अवधी Avañe'ẽ Авар Aymar aru Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Basa Bali বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gú Basa Banyumasan Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Bikol Central Bislama Български Boarisch བོད་ཡིག Bosanski Brezhoneg Буряад Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština Cha
tral Bislama Български Boarisch བོད་ཡིག Bosanski Brezhoneg Буряад Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština Chamoru Chavacano de Zamboanga Chi-Chewa ChiTumbuka Corsu Cymraeg Dansk الدارجة Davvisámegiella Deutsch डोटेली Eesti Ελληνικά Emiliàn e rumagnòl Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Føroyskt Français Frysk Gaeilge Gaelg Gàidhlig Galego 贛語 ગુજરાતી 𐌲𐌿𐍄𐌹𐍃𐌺 गोंयची कोंकणी / Gõychi Konknni 客家語/Hak-kâ-ngî Хальмг 한국어 Hausa Hawaiʻi Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Hulontalo Ido Ilokano Bahasa In
語/Hak-kâ-ngî Хальмг 한국어 Hausa Hawaiʻi Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Hulontalo Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Ирон IsiXhosa IsiZulu Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa Kabɩyɛ ಕನ್ನಡ Kapampangan Къарачай-малкъар ქართული कॉशुर / کٲشُر Қазақша Kernowek Kiswahili Kotava Kreyòl ayisyen Kriyòl gwiyannen Kurdî Кыргызча Ladin Ladino ລາວ Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Лезги Lietuvių Ligure Limburgs Lingála Lingua Franca Nova Livvinkarjala La .lojban. Lombard Magyar मैथिली Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം Mal
la Lingua Franca Nova Livvinkarjala La .lojban. Lombard Magyar मैथिली Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം Malti Māori मराठी მარგალური مصرى ဘာသာမန် مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Mirandés Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nāhuatl Na Vosa Vakaviti Nederlands Nedersaksies नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Napulitano Нохчийн Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Novial Occitan Олык марий ଓଡ଼ିଆ Oromoo Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Pälzisch پنجابی پښتو Patois ភាសាខ្មែរ Picard Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Portuguê
 ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Pälzisch پنجابی پښتو Patois ភាសាខ្មែរ Picard Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Qırımtatarca Ripoarisch Română Runa Simi Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла Sakizaya संस्कृतम् ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ Sardu Scots Seeltersk Sesotho sa Leboa Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina Ślůnski Soomaaliga کوردی Sranantongo Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Taclḥit Taqbaylit Tarandíne Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు Tetun ไทย Т
и Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Taclḥit Taqbaylit Tarandíne Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు Tetun ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Türkmençe Tyap Тыва дыл Удмурт Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt Volapük Võro 文言 West-Vlams Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki Zeêuws Žemaitėška 中文 Betawi Tolışi Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special
de Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikinews Wikiquote Wikisource Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Italian Renaissance polymath (1452–1519) "Da Vinci" redirects here. For other uses, see Da Vinci (disambiguation) 
sance polymath (1452–1519) "Da Vinci" redirects here. For other uses, see Da Vinci (disambiguation) and Leonardo da Vinci (disambiguation) . In this Renaissance Florentine name , the name da Vinci is an indicator of birthplace, not a family name ; the person is properly referred to by the given name , Leonardo . Leonardo da Vinci This portrait attributed to Francesco Melzi , c. 1515–1518 , is the only certain contemporary depiction of Leonardo. [1] [2] Born Leonardo di ser Piero da Vinci ( 1452-
only certain contemporary depiction of Leonardo. [1] [2] Born Leonardo di ser Piero da Vinci ( 1452-04-15 ) 15 April 1452 (possibly Anchiano ), [a] Vinci, Republic of Florence Died 2 May 1519 (1519-05-02) (aged 67) Clos Lucé , Amboise, Kingdom of France Resting place Château d'Amboise Education Studio of Andrea del Verrocchio Years active c. 1470–1519 Known for Painting drawing engineering anatomical studies hydrology botany optics geology Notable work Virgin of the Rocks ( c. 1483–1493 ) Lady w
cal studies hydrology botany optics geology Notable work Virgin of the Rocks ( c. 1483–1493 ) Lady with an Ermine ( c. 1489–1491 ) The Vitruvian Man ( c. 1490 ) The Last Supper ( c. 1495–1498 ) Mona Lisa ( c. 1503–1516 ) Movement High Renaissance Family Da Vinci family Signature Leonardo di ser Piero da Vinci [b] (15 April 1452 – 2 May 1519) was an Italian polymath of the High Renaissance who was active as a painter, draughtsman, engineer, scientist, theorist, sculptor, and architect. [3] While 
active as a painter, draughtsman, engineer, scientist, theorist, sculptor, and architect. [3] While his fame initially rested on his achievements as a painter, he has also become known for his notebooks , in which he made drawings and notes on a variety of subjects, including anatomy, astronomy, botany, cartography, painting, and palaeontology . Leonardo is widely regarded to have been a genius who epitomised the Renaissance humanist ideal, [4] and his collective works comprise a contribution to
o epitomised the Renaissance humanist ideal, [4] and his collective works comprise a contribution to later generations of artists matched only by that of his younger contemporary Michelangelo . [3] [4] Born out of wedlock to a successful notary and a lower-class woman in, or near, Vinci , he was educated in Florence by the Italian painter and sculptor Andrea del Verrocchio . He began his career in the city, but then spent much time in the service of Ludovico Sforza in Milan. Later, he worked in 
 the city, but then spent much time in the service of Ludovico Sforza in Milan. Later, he worked in Florence and Milan again, as well as briefly in Rome , all while attracting a large following of imitators and students. Upon the invitation of Francis I , he spent his last three years in France, where he died in 1519. Since his death, there has not been a time where his achievements, diverse interests, personal life , and empirical thinking have failed to incite interest and admiration, [3] [4] 
ests, personal life , and empirical thinking have failed to incite interest and admiration, [3] [4] making him a frequent namesake and subject in culture . Leonardo is identified as one of the greatest painters in the history of Western art and is often credited as the founder of the High Renaissance. [3] Despite having many lost works and fewer than 25 attributed major works –  including numerous unfinished works –  he created some of the most influential paintings in the Western canon . [3] Hi
 unfinished works –  he created some of the most influential paintings in the Western canon . [3] His magnum opus , the Mona Lisa , is his best known work and is the world's most famous individual painting. The Last Supper is the most reproduced religious painting of all time and his Vitruvian Man drawing is also regarded as a cultural icon. In 2017, Salvator Mundi , attributed in whole or part to Leonardo, [5] was sold at auction for US$450.3 million , setting a new record for the most expensiv
 Leonardo, [5] was sold at auction for US$450.3 million , setting a new record for the most expensive painting ever sold at public auction. Revered for his technological ingenuity , he conceptualised flying machines, a type of armoured fighting vehicle , concentrated solar power, a ratio machine that could be used in an adding machine , [6] [7] and the double hull . Relatively few of his designs were constructed or were even feasible during his lifetime, as the modern scientific approaches to me
ere constructed or were even feasible during his lifetime, as the modern scientific approaches to metallurgy and engineering were only in their infancy during the Renaissance . Some of his smaller inventions, however, entered the world of manufacturing unheralded, such as an automated bobbin winder and a machine for testing the tensile strength of wire. He made substantial discoveries in anatomy , civil engineering, hydrodynamics , geology, optics , and tribology , but he did not publish his fin
 civil engineering, hydrodynamics , geology, optics , and tribology , but he did not publish his findings and they had little to no direct influence on subsequent science. [8] Biography Early life (1452–1472) Birth and background Leonardo Da Vinci's baptism record Leonardo da Vinci, properly named Leonardo di ser Piero da Vinci [b] ("Leonardo, son of ser Piero from Vinci"), [9] [10] [c] was born on 15 April 1452 in, or close to, the Tuscan hill town of Vinci , 20 miles from Florence . [11] [12] 
n 15 April 1452 in, or close to, the Tuscan hill town of Vinci , 20 miles from Florence . [11] [12] [d] He was born out of wedlock to Piero da Vinci (Ser Piero da Vinci d'Antonio di ser Piero di ser Guido; 1426–1504), [16] a Florentine legal notary , [11] and Caterina di Meo Lippi ( c. 1434–1494 ), from the lower class. [17] [18] [e] It remains uncertain where Leonardo was born; the traditional account, from a local oral tradition recorded by the historian Emanuele Repetti , [21] is that he was 
count, from a local oral tradition recorded by the historian Emanuele Repetti , [21] is that he was born in Anchiano , a country hamlet that would have offered sufficient privacy for the illegitimate birth, though it is still possible he was born in a house in Florence that Ser Piero almost certainly had. [22] [a] Leonardo's parents both married separately the year after his birth. Caterina –  who later appears in Leonardo's notes as only "Caterina" or "Catelina" –  is usually identified as the 
 later appears in Leonardo's notes as only "Caterina" or "Catelina" –  is usually identified as the Caterina Buti del Vacca, who married the local artisan Antonio di Piero Buti del Vacca, nicknamed L'Accattabriga , 'the quarrelsome one'. [17] [21] Ser Piero married Albiera Amadori –   having been betrothed to her the previous year –   and after her death in 1464, went on to have three subsequent marriages. [21] [23] [f] From all the marriages, Leonardo eventually had 16 half-siblings (of whom 11
arriages. [21] [23] [f] From all the marriages, Leonardo eventually had 16 half-siblings (of whom 11 survived infancy) [24] who were much younger than he (the last was born when Leonardo was 46 years old) [24] and with whom he had very little contact. [g] The possible birthplace and childhood home of Leonardo in Anchiano , Vinci , Italy Very little is known about Leonardo's childhood and much is shrouded in myth, partially because of his biography in the frequently apocryphal Lives of the Most E
hrouded in myth, partially because of his biography in the frequently apocryphal Lives of the Most Excellent Painters, Sculptors, and Architects (1550) by 16th-century art historian Giorgio Vasari . [27] [28] Tax records indicate that by at least 1457 he lived in the household of his paternal grandfather, Antonio da Vinci, [11] but it is possible that he spent the years before then in the care of his mother in Vinci, either Anchiano or Campo Zeppi in the parish of San Pantaleone. [29] [30] He is
his mother in Vinci, either Anchiano or Campo Zeppi in the parish of San Pantaleone. [29] [30] He is thought to have been close to his uncle, Francesco da Vinci, [3] but his father was probably in Florence most of the time. [11] Ser Piero, who was the descendant of a long line of notaries, established an official residence in Florence by at least 1469 and had a successful career. [11] Despite his family history, Leonardo only received a basic and informal education in (vernacular) writing, readi
family history, Leonardo only received a basic and informal education in (vernacular) writing, reading, and mathematics; possibly because his artistic talents were recognised early, so his family decided to focus their attention there. [11] Later in life, Leonardo recorded his earliest memory, now in the Codex Atlanticus . [31] While writing on the flight of birds, he recalled as an infant when a kite came to his cradle and opened his mouth with its tail; commentators still debate whether the an
kite came to his cradle and opened his mouth with its tail; commentators still debate whether the anecdote was an actual memory or a fantasy. [32] Verrocchio's workshop The Baptism of Christ (1472–1475) by Verrocchio and Leonardo, Uffizi Gallery In the mid-1460s, Leonardo's family moved to Florence, which at the time was the centre of Christian Humanist thought and culture. [33] Around the age of 14, [25] he became a garzone (studio boy) in the workshop of Andrea del Verrocchio , who was the lea
14, [25] he became a garzone (studio boy) in the workshop of Andrea del Verrocchio , who was the leading Florentine painter and sculptor of his time. [33] This was about the time of the death of Verrocchio's master, the great sculptor Donatello . [h] Leonardo became an apprentice by the age of 17 and remained in training for seven years. [35] Other famous painters apprenticed in the workshop or associated with it include Ghirlandaio , Perugino , Botticelli , and Lorenzo di Credi . [36] [37] Leon
sociated with it include Ghirlandaio , Perugino , Botticelli , and Lorenzo di Credi . [36] [37] Leonardo was exposed to both theoretical training and a wide range of technical skills, [38] including drafting, chemistry, metallurgy, metal working, plaster casting, leather working, mechanics, and woodwork, as well as the artistic skills of drawing, painting, sculpting, and modelling. [39] [i] Leonardo was a contemporary of Botticelli, Ghirlandaio and Perugino, who were all slightly older than he w
do was a contemporary of Botticelli, Ghirlandaio and Perugino, who were all slightly older than he was. [40] He would have met them at the workshop of Verrocchio or at the Platonic Academy of the Medici . [36] Florence was ornamented by the works of artists such as Donatello's contemporaries Masaccio , whose figurative frescoes were imbued with realism and emotion, and Ghiberti , whose Gates of Paradise , gleaming with gold leaf , displayed the art of combining complex figure compositions with d
radise , gleaming with gold leaf , displayed the art of combining complex figure compositions with detailed architectural backgrounds. Piero della Francesca had made a detailed study of perspective , [41] and was the first painter to make a scientific study of light. These studies and Leon Battista Alberti 's treatise De pictura were to have a profound effect on younger artists and in particular on Leonardo's own observations and artworks. [34] [42] Much of the painting in Verrocchio's workshop 
n Leonardo's own observations and artworks. [34] [42] Much of the painting in Verrocchio's workshop was done by his assistants. According to Vasari, Leonardo collaborated with Verrocchio on his The Baptism of Christ ( c. 1472–1475 ), painting the young angel holding Jesus's robe with skill so far superior to his master's that Verrocchio purportedly put down his brush and never painted again [‡ 1] (the latter claim probably being apocryphal). [14] The new technique of oil paint was applied to are
(the latter claim probably being apocryphal). [14] The new technique of oil paint was applied to areas of the mostly tempera work, including the landscape, the rocks seen through the brown mountain stream, and much of Jesus's figure, indicating Leonardo's hand. [43] Additionally, Leonardo may have been a model for two works by Verrocchio: the bronze statue of David in the Bargello and the archangel Raphael in Tobias and the Angel . [14] Vasari tells a story of Leonardo as a very young man: a loc
l Raphael in Tobias and the Angel . [14] Vasari tells a story of Leonardo as a very young man: a local peasant made himself a round buckler shield and requested that Ser Piero have it painted for him. Leonardo, inspired by the story of Medusa , responded with a painting of a monster spitting fire that was so terrifying that his father bought a different shield to give to the peasant and sold Leonardo's to a Florentine art dealer for 100 ducats , who in turn sold it to the Duke of Milan . [‡ 2] F
rdo's to a Florentine art dealer for 100 ducats , who in turn sold it to the Duke of Milan . [‡ 2] First Florentine period (1472–c. 1482) Adoration of the Magi c. 1478–1482 , [d 1] Uffizi , Florence By 1472, at the age of 20, Leonardo qualified as a master in the Guild of Saint Luke , the guild of artists and doctors of medicine, [j] but even after his father set him up in his own workshop, his attachment to Verrocchio was such that he continued to collaborate and live with him. [36] [44] Leonar
tachment to Verrocchio was such that he continued to collaborate and live with him. [36] [44] Leonardo's earliest known dated work is a 1473 pen-and-ink drawing of the Arno valley (see below). [37] [45] [k] According to Vasari, the young Leonardo was the first to suggest making the Arno river a navigable channel between Florence and Pisa . [46] In January 1478, Leonardo received an independent commission to paint an altarpiece for the Chapel of Saint Bernard in the Palazzo Vecchio , [47] an indi
mission to paint an altarpiece for the Chapel of Saint Bernard in the Palazzo Vecchio , [47] an indication of his independence from Verrocchio's studio. An anonymous early biographer, known as Anonimo Gaddiano , claims that in 1480 Leonardo was living with the Medici and often worked in the garden of the Piazza San Marco, Florence , where a Neoplatonic academy of artists, poets and philosophers organised by the Medici met. [14] [l] In March 1481, he received a commission from the monks of San Do
ganised by the Medici met. [14] [l] In March 1481, he received a commission from the monks of San Donato in Scopeto for The Adoration of the Magi . [48] Neither of these initial commissions were completed, being abandoned when Leonardo went to offer his services to Duke of Milan Ludovico Sforza . Leonardo wrote Sforza a letter which described the diverse things that he could achieve in the fields of engineering and weapon design, and mentioned that he could paint. [37] [49] He brought with him a
of engineering and weapon design, and mentioned that he could paint. [37] [49] He brought with him a silver string instrument –  either a lute or lyre –  in the form of a horse's head. [49] With Alberti, Leonardo visited the home of the Medici and through them came to know the older Humanist philosophers of whom Marsiglio Ficino , proponent of Neoplatonism ; Cristoforo Landino , writer of commentaries on Classical writings, and John Argyropoulos , teacher of Greek and translator of Aristotle wer
ries on Classical writings, and John Argyropoulos , teacher of Greek and translator of Aristotle were the foremost. Also associated with the Platonic Academy of the Medici was Leonardo's contemporary, the brilliant young poet and philosopher Pico della Mirandola . [40] [42] [50] In 1482, Leonardo was sent as an ambassador by Lorenzo de' Medici to Ludovico il Moro , who ruled Milan between 1479 and 1499. [40] [14] Madonna of the Carnation , c. 1472–1478 , Alte Pinakothek , Munich Landscape of the
 1499. [40] [14] Madonna of the Carnation , c. 1472–1478 , Alte Pinakothek , Munich Landscape of the Arno Valley (1473) Ginevra de' Benci , c. 1474–1480 , National Gallery of Art , Washington D.C. Benois Madonna , c. 1478–1481 , Hermitage , Saint Petersburg Sketch of the hanging of Bernardo Bandini Baroncelli , 1479 First Milanese period (c. 1482–1499) Virgin of the Rocks , c. 1483–1493 , [d 2] Louvre version Leonardo worked in Milan from 1482 until 1499. He was commissioned to paint the Virgin 
uvre version Leonardo worked in Milan from 1482 until 1499. He was commissioned to paint the Virgin of the Rocks for the Confraternity of the Immaculate Conception and The Last Supper for the monastery of Santa Maria delle Grazie . [51] In the spring of 1485, Leonardo travelled to Hungary (on behalf of Sforza) to meet king Matthias Corvinus , and was commissioned by him to paint a Madonna . [52] In 1490 he was called as a consultant, together with Francesco di Giorgio Martini , for the building 
n 1490 he was called as a consultant, together with Francesco di Giorgio Martini , for the building site of the cathedral of Pavia [53] [54] and was struck by the equestrian statue of Regisole , of which he left a sketch. [55] Leonardo was employed on many other projects for Sforza, such as preparation of floats and pageants for special occasions; a drawing of , and wooden model for, a competition to design the cupola for Milan Cathedral ; [56] and a model for a huge equestrian monument to Ludov
 to design the cupola for Milan Cathedral ; [56] and a model for a huge equestrian monument to Ludovico's predecessor Francesco Sforza . This would have surpassed in size the only two large equestrian statues of the Renaissance, Donatello 's Gattamelata in Padua and Verrocchio's Bartolomeo Colleoni in Venice, and became known as the Gran Cavallo . [37] Leonardo completed a model for the horse and made detailed plans for its casting , [37] but in November 1494, Ludovico gave the metal to his brot
made detailed plans for its casting , [37] but in November 1494, Ludovico gave the metal to his brother-in-law to be used for a cannon to defend the city from Charles VIII of France . [37] Contemporary correspondence records that Leonardo and his assistants were commissioned by the Duke of Milan to paint the Sala delle Asse in the Sforza Castle , c. 1498. [57] The project became a trompe-l'œil decoration that made the great hall appear to be a pergola created by the interwoven limbs of sixteen m
oration that made the great hall appear to be a pergola created by the interwoven limbs of sixteen mulberry trees, [58] whose canopy included an intricate labyrinth of leaves and knots on the ceiling. [59] Head of a Woman , c. 1483–1485 , Royal Library of Turin Portrait of a Musician , c. 1483–1487 , Pinacoteca Ambrosiana , Milan The Vitruvian Man ( c. 1485 ) Accademia , Venice Leonardo's horse in silverpoint , c. 1488 [60] La Belle Ferronnière , c. 1490–1498 Detail of 1902 restoration, trompe-l
 silverpoint , c. 1488 [60] La Belle Ferronnière , c. 1490–1498 Detail of 1902 restoration, trompe-l'œil painting (1498) Second Florentine period (1500–1508) The Virgin and Child with Saint Anne and Saint John the Baptist , c. 1499–1508 , National Gallery , London When Ludovico Sforza was overthrown by France in 1500, Leonardo fled Milan for Venice , accompanied by his assistant Salaì and friend, the mathematician Luca Pacioli . [61] In Venice, Leonardo was employed as a military architect and e
the mathematician Luca Pacioli . [61] In Venice, Leonardo was employed as a military architect and engineer, devising methods to defend the city from naval attack. [36] On his return to Florence in 1500, he and his household were guests of the Servite monks at the monastery of Santissima Annunziata and were provided with a workshop where, according to Vasari, Leonardo created the cartoon of The Virgin and Child with Saint Anne and Saint John the Baptist , a work that won such admiration that "me
rgin and Child with Saint Anne and Saint John the Baptist , a work that won such admiration that "men [and] women, young and old" flocked to see it "as if they were going to a solemn festival." [‡ 3] [m] In Cesena in 1502, Leonardo entered the service of Cesare Borgia , the son of Pope Alexander VI , acting as a military architect and engineer and travelling throughout Italy with his patron. [61] Leonardo created a map of Cesare Borgia's stronghold, a town plan of Imola in order to win his patro
Leonardo created a map of Cesare Borgia's stronghold, a town plan of Imola in order to win his patronage. Upon seeing it, Cesare hired Leonardo as his chief military engineer and architect. Later in the year, Leonardo produced another map for his patron, one of Chiana Valley , Tuscany, so as to give his patron a better overlay of the land and greater strategic position. He created this map in conjunction with his other project of constructing a dam from the sea to Florence, in order to allow a s
unction with his other project of constructing a dam from the sea to Florence, in order to allow a supply of water to sustain the canal during all seasons. Leonardo had left Borgia's service and returned to Florence by early 1503, [63] where he rejoined the Guild of Saint Luke on 18 October of that year. By this same month, Leonardo had begun working on a portrait of Lisa del Giocondo , the model for the Mona Lisa , [64] [65] which he would continue working on until his twilight years. In Januar
for the Mona Lisa , [64] [65] which he would continue working on until his twilight years. In January 1504, he was part of a committee formed to recommend where Michelangelo's statue of David should be placed. [66] He then spent two years in Florence designing and painting a mural of The Battle of Anghiari for the Signoria, [61] with Michelangelo designing its companion piece, The Battle of Cascina . [n] In 1506, Leonardo was summoned to Milan by Charles II d'Amboise , the acting French governor
a . [n] In 1506, Leonardo was summoned to Milan by Charles II d'Amboise , the acting French governor of the city. [69] There, Leonardo took on another pupil, Count Francesco Melzi , the son of a Lombard aristocrat, who is considered to have been his favourite student. [36] The Council of Florence wished Leonardo to return promptly to finish The Battle of Anghiari , but he was given leave at the behest of Louis XII , who considered commissioning the artist to make some portraits. [69] Leonardo ma
hest of Louis XII , who considered commissioning the artist to make some portraits. [69] Leonardo may have commenced a project for an equestrian figure of d'Amboise; [70] a wax model survives and, if genuine, is the only extant example of Leonardo's sculpture. Leonardo was otherwise free to pursue his scientific interests. [69] Many of Leonardo's most prominent pupils either knew or worked with him in Milan, [36] including Bernardino Luini , Giovanni Antonio Boltraffio , and Marco d'Oggiono . In
m in Milan, [36] including Bernardino Luini , Giovanni Antonio Boltraffio , and Marco d'Oggiono . In 1507, Leonardo was in Florence sorting out a dispute with his brothers over the estate of his father, who had died in 1504. The Virgin and Child with Saint Anne , c. 1501–1519 , Louvre, Paris Leonardo's map of Imola , created for Cesare Borgia , 1502 Study for The Battle of Anghiari (now lost), c. 1503 , Museum of Fine Arts , Budapest La Scapigliata , c. 1506–1508 (unfinished), Galleria Nazionale
1503 , Museum of Fine Arts , Budapest La Scapigliata , c. 1506–1508 (unfinished), Galleria Nazionale di Parma , Parma Study for Leda and the Swan (now lost), c. 1506–1508 , Chatsworth House , England Second Milanese period (1508–1513) By 1508, Leonardo was back in Milan, living in his own house in Porta Orientale in the parish of Santa Babila. [71] In 1512, Leonardo was working on plans for an equestrian monument for Gian Giacomo Trivulzio , but this was prevented by an invasion of a confederati
estrian monument for Gian Giacomo Trivulzio , but this was prevented by an invasion of a confederation of Swiss, Spanish and Venetian forces, which drove the French from Milan. Leonardo stayed in the city, spending several months in 1513 at the Medici's Vaprio d'Adda villa. [72] Rome and France (1513–1519) An apocalyptic deluge drawn in black chalk by Leonardo near the end of his life (part of a series of 10, paired with written description in his notebooks) [73] In March 1513, Lorenzo de' Medic
eries of 10, paired with written description in his notebooks) [73] In March 1513, Lorenzo de' Medici's son Giovanni assumed the papacy (as Leo X); Leonardo went to Rome that September, where he was received by the pope's brother Giuliano . [72] From September 1513 to 1516, Leonardo spent much of his time living in the Belvedere Courtyard in the Apostolic Palace , where Michelangelo and Raphael were both active. [71] Leonardo was given an allowance of 33 ducats a month and, according to Vasari, 
re both active. [71] Leonardo was given an allowance of 33 ducats a month and, according to Vasari, decorated a lizard with scales dipped in quicksilver . [74] The pope gave him a painting commission of unknown subject matter, but cancelled it when the artist set about developing a new kind of varnish . [74] [o] Leonardo became ill, in what may have been the first of multiple strokes leading to his death. [74] He practised botany in the Vatican Gardens , and was commissioned to make plans for th
s death. [74] He practised botany in the Vatican Gardens , and was commissioned to make plans for the Pope's proposed draining of the Pontine Marshes . [75] He also dissected cadavers , making notes for a treatise on vocal cords ; [76] these he gave to an official in hopes of regaining the Pope's favour, but he was unsuccessful. [74] In October 1515, King Francis I of France recaptured Milan. [48] [p] On 21 March 1516 Antonio Maria Pallavicini, the French ambassador to the Holy See , received a 
 [p] On 21 March 1516 Antonio Maria Pallavicini, the French ambassador to the Holy See , received a letter sent from Lyon a week previously by the royal advisor Guillaume Gouffier, seigneur de Bonnivet , containing the French king's instructions to assist Leonardo in his relocation to France and to inform the artist that the King was eagerly awaiting his arrival. Pallavicini was also asked to reassure Leonardo that he would be well received at court, both by the King and by his mother, Louise of
sure Leonardo that he would be well received at court, both by the King and by his mother, Louise of Savoy . [78] Leonardo entered Francis's service later that year, and was given the use of the manor house Clos Lucé near the King's residence at the royal Château d'Amboise . He was frequently visited by Francis, and drew plans for an immense castle town the King intended to erect at Romorantin . He also made a mechanical lion, which during a pageant walked towards the King and –  upon being stru
e also made a mechanical lion, which during a pageant walked towards the King and –  upon being struck by a wand –  opened its chest to reveal a cluster of lilies. [79] [‡ 3] [q] Leonardo was accompanied during this time by his friend and apprentice Francesco Melzi, and was supported by a pension totalling 10,000 scudi . [71] At some point, Melzi drew a portrait of Leonardo ; the only others known from his lifetime were a sketch by an unknown assistant on the back of one of Leonardo's studies ( 
 from his lifetime were a sketch by an unknown assistant on the back of one of Leonardo's studies ( c. 1517 ) [81] and a drawing by Giovanni Ambrogio Figino depicting an elderly Leonardo with his right arm wrapped in clothing. [82] [r] The latter, in addition to the record of an October 1517 visit by Louis d'Aragon , [s] confirms an account of Leonardo's right hand being paralytic when he was 65, [85] which may indicate why he left works such as the Mona Lisa unfinished. [83] [86] [87] He contin
[85] which may indicate why he left works such as the Mona Lisa unfinished. [83] [86] [87] He continued to work at some capacity until eventually becoming ill and bedridden for several months. [85] Death Leonardo died at Clos Lucé on 2 May 1519 at the age of 67, possibly of a stroke. [88] [87] [89] Francis I had become a close friend. Vasari describes Leonardo as lamenting on his deathbed, full of repentance, that "he had offended against God and men by failing to practice his art as he should h
 repentance, that "he had offended against God and men by failing to practice his art as he should have done." [90] Vasari states that in his last days, Leonardo sent for a priest to make his confession and to receive the Holy Sacrament . [‡ 4] Vasari also records that the King held Leonardo's head in his arms as he died, although this story may be legend rather than fact. [t] [u] In accordance with his will, sixty beggars carrying tapers followed Leonardo's casket. [50] [v] Melzi was the princi
th his will, sixty beggars carrying tapers followed Leonardo's casket. [50] [v] Melzi was the principal heir and executor, receiving, as well as money, Leonardo's paintings, tools, library and personal effects. Leonardo's other long-time pupil and companion, Salaì, and his servant Baptista de Vilanis, each received half of Leonardo's vineyards . [92] His brothers received land, and his serving woman received a fur-lined cloak. On 12 August 1519, Leonardo's remains were interred in the Collegiate
an received a fur-lined cloak. On 12 August 1519, Leonardo's remains were interred in the Collegiate Church of Saint Florentin at the Château d'Amboise. [93] Some 20 years after Leonardo's death, Francis was reported by the goldsmith and sculptor Benvenuto Cellini as saying: "There had never been another man born in the world who knew as much as Leonardo, not so much about painting, sculpture and architecture, as that he was a very great philosopher." [94] Drawing of the Château d'Amboise ( c. 1
architecture, as that he was a very great philosopher." [94] Drawing of the Château d'Amboise ( c. 1518 ) attributed to Francesco Melzi Salaì , or Il Salaino ("The Little Unclean One", i.e., the devil), entered Leonardo's household in 1490 as an assistant. After only a year, Leonardo made a list of his misdemeanours, calling him "a thief, a liar, stubborn, and a glutton," after he had made off with money and valuables on at least five occasions and spent a fortune on clothes. [95] Nevertheless, 
h money and valuables on at least five occasions and spent a fortune on clothes. [95] Nevertheless, Leonardo treated him with great indulgence, and he remained in Leonardo's household for the next thirty years. [96] Salaì executed a number of paintings under the name of Andrea Salaì, but although Vasari claims that Leonardo "taught him many things about painting," [‡ 3] his work is generally considered to be of less artistic merit than others among Leonardo's pupils, such as Marco d'Oggiono and 
dered to be of less artistic merit than others among Leonardo's pupils, such as Marco d'Oggiono and Boltraffio . At the time of his death in 1524, Salaì owned a painting referred to as Joconda in a posthumous inventory of his belongings; it was assessed at 505 lire, an exceptionally high valuation for a small panel portrait. [97] Personal life Main article: Personal life of Leonardo da Vinci Saint John the Baptist c. 1507–1516 , [d 3] Louvre. Leonardo is thought to have used Salaì as the model. 
 John the Baptist c. 1507–1516 , [d 3] Louvre. Leonardo is thought to have used Salaì as the model. [98] Despite the thousands of pages Leonardo left in notebooks and manuscripts, he scarcely made reference to his personal life. [2] Within Leonardo's lifetime, his extraordinary powers of invention, his "great physical beauty" and "infinite grace," as described by Vasari , [‡ 5] as well as all other aspects of his life, attracted the curiosity of others. One such aspect was his love for animals, 
r aspects of his life, attracted the curiosity of others. One such aspect was his love for animals, likely including vegetarianism and according to Vasari, a habit of purchasing caged birds and releasing them. [99] [‡ 6] Leonardo had many friends who are now notable either in their fields or for their historical significance, including mathematician Luca Pacioli , [100] with whom he collaborated on the book Divina proportione in the 1490s. Leonardo appears to have had no close relationships with
n the book Divina proportione in the 1490s. Leonardo appears to have had no close relationships with women except for his friendship with Cecilia Gallerani and the two Este sisters, Beatrice and Isabella . [101] While on a journey that took him through Mantua , he drew a portrait of Isabella that appears to have been used to create a painted portrait, now lost. [36] Beyond friendship, Leonardo kept his private life secret. His sexuality has been the subject of satire, analysis, and speculation. 
t his private life secret. His sexuality has been the subject of satire, analysis, and speculation. This trend began in the mid-16th century and was revived in the 19th and 20th centuries, most notably by Sigmund Freud in his Leonardo da Vinci, A Memory of His Childhood . [102] Leonardo's most intimate relationships were perhaps with his pupils Salaì and Melzi . Melzi, writing to inform Leonardo's brothers of his death, described Leonardo's feelings for his pupils as both loving and passionate. 
 brothers of his death, described Leonardo's feelings for his pupils as both loving and passionate. It has been claimed since the 16th century that these relationships were of a sexual or erotic nature. Walter Isaacson in his biography of Leonardo makes explicit his opinion that the relations with Salaì were intimate and homosexual. [103] Earlier in Leonardo's life, court records of 1476, when he was aged twenty-four, show that Leonardo and three other young men were charged with sodomy in an in
was aged twenty-four, show that Leonardo and three other young men were charged with sodomy in an incident involving a known male prostitute. The charges were dismissed for lack of evidence, and there is speculation that since one of the accused, Lionardo de Tornabuoni, was related to Lorenzo de' Medici, the family exerted its influence to secure the dismissal. [104] Since that date much has been written about his presumed homosexuality [105] and its role in his art, particularly in the androgyn
written about his presumed homosexuality [105] and its role in his art, particularly in the androgyny and eroticism manifested in Saint John the Baptist and Bacchus and more explicitly in a number of erotic drawings. [106] [98] Paintings See also: List of works by Leonardo da Vinci Despite the recent awareness and admiration of Leonardo as a scientist and inventor, for the better part of four hundred years his fame rested on his achievements as a painter. A handful of works that are either authe
red years his fame rested on his achievements as a painter. A handful of works that are either authenticated or attributed to him have been regarded as among the great masterpieces. These paintings are famous for a variety of qualities that have been much imitated by students and discussed at great length by connoisseurs and critics. By the 1490s Leonardo had already been described as a "Divine" painter. [107] Among the qualities that make Leonardo's work unique are his innovative techniques for
ainter. [107] Among the qualities that make Leonardo's work unique are his innovative techniques for laying on the paint; his detailed knowledge of anatomy, light, botany and geology; his interest in physiognomy and the way humans register emotion in expression and gesture; his innovative use of the human form in figurative composition; and his use of subtle gradation of tone. All these qualities come together in his most famous painted works, the Mona Lisa , the Last Supper , and the Virgin of 
come together in his most famous painted works, the Mona Lisa , the Last Supper , and the Virgin of the Rocks . [w] Early works Annunciation c. 1472–1476 , [d 4] Uffizi , is thought to be Leonardo's earliest extant and complete major work. Leonardo first gained attention for his work on the Baptism of Christ , painted in conjunction with Verrocchio. Two other paintings appear to date from his time at Verrocchio's workshop, both of which are Annunciations . One is small, 59 centimetres (23 in) lo
 at Verrocchio's workshop, both of which are Annunciations . One is small, 59 centimetres (23 in) long and 14 cm (5.5 in) high. It is a " predella " to go at the base of a larger composition, a painting by Lorenzo di Credi from which it has become separated. The other is a much larger work, 217 cm (85 in) long. [108] In both Annunciations, Leonardo used a formal arrangement, like two well-known pictures by Fra Angelico of the same subject, of the Virgin Mary sitting or kneeling to the right of t
ctures by Fra Angelico of the same subject, of the Virgin Mary sitting or kneeling to the right of the picture, approached from the left by an angel in profile, with a rich flowing garment, raised wings and bearing a lily. Although previously attributed to Ghirlandaio, the larger work is now generally attributed to Leonardo. [109] In the smaller painting, Mary averts her eyes and folds her hands in a gesture that symbolised submission to God's will. Mary is not submissive, however, in the larger
n a gesture that symbolised submission to God's will. Mary is not submissive, however, in the larger piece. The girl, interrupted in her reading by this unexpected messenger, puts a finger in her bible to mark the place and raises her hand in a formal gesture of greeting or surprise. [34] This calm young woman appears to accept her role as the Mother of God , not with resignation but with confidence. In this painting, the young Leonardo presents the humanist face of the Virgin Mary, recognising 
ce. In this painting, the young Leonardo presents the humanist face of the Virgin Mary, recognising humanity's role in God's incarnation. Paintings of the 1480s Saint Jerome in the Wilderness (unfinished) c. 1480–1490 , [d 5] Vatican In the 1480s, Leonardo received two very important commissions and commenced another work that was of ground-breaking importance in terms of composition. Two of the three were never finished, and the third took so long that it was subject to lengthy negotiations ove
hree were never finished, and the third took so long that it was subject to lengthy negotiations over completion and payment. One of these paintings was Saint Jerome in the Wilderness , which Bortolon associates with a difficult period of Leonardo's life, as evidenced in his diary: "I thought I was learning to live; I was only learning to die." [36] Although the painting is barely begun, the composition can be seen and is very unusual. [x] Jerome , as a penitent , occupies the middle of the pict
sition can be seen and is very unusual. [x] Jerome , as a penitent , occupies the middle of the picture, set on a slight diagonal and viewed somewhat from above. His kneeling form takes on a trapezoid shape, with one arm stretched to the outer edge of the painting and his gaze looking in the opposite direction. J. Wasserman points out the link between this painting and Leonardo's anatomical studies. [110] Across the foreground sprawls his symbol, a great lion whose body and tail make a double sp
s. [110] Across the foreground sprawls his symbol, a great lion whose body and tail make a double spiral across the base of the picture space. The other remarkable feature is the sketchy landscape of craggy rocks against which the figure is silhouetted. The daring display of figure composition, the landscape elements and personal drama also appear in the great unfinished masterpiece, the Adoration of the Magi , a commission from the Monks of San Donato a Scopeto. It is a complex composition, of 
 of the Magi , a commission from the Monks of San Donato a Scopeto. It is a complex composition, of about 250 x 250 centimetres. Leonardo did numerous drawings and preparatory studies, including a detailed one in linear perspective of the ruined classical architecture that forms part of the background. In 1482 Leonardo went to Milan at the behest of Lorenzo de' Medici in order to win favour with Ludovico il Moro, and the painting was abandoned. [14] Lady with an Ermine , c. 1489–1491 , [d 6] Cza
udovico il Moro, and the painting was abandoned. [14] Lady with an Ermine , c. 1489–1491 , [d 6] Czartoryski Museum , Kraków , Poland The third important work of this period is the Virgin of the Rocks , commissioned in Milan for the Confraternity of the Immaculate Conception. The painting, to be done with the assistance of the de Predis brothers , was to fill a large complex altarpiece . [111] Leonardo chose to paint an apocryphal moment of the infancy of Christ when the infant John the Baptist 
nardo chose to paint an apocryphal moment of the infancy of Christ when the infant John the Baptist , in protection of an angel, met the Holy Family on the road to Egypt. The painting demonstrates an eerie beauty as the graceful figures kneel in adoration around the infant Christ in a wild landscape of tumbling rock and whirling water. [112] While the painting is quite large, about 200×120 centimetres , it is not nearly as complex as the painting ordered by the monks of San Donato, having only f
tres , it is not nearly as complex as the painting ordered by the monks of San Donato, having only four figures rather than about fifty and a rocky landscape rather than architectural details. The painting was eventually finished; in fact, two versions of the painting were finished: one remained at the chapel of the Confraternity, while Leonardo took the other to France. The Brothers did not get their painting, however, nor the de Predis their payment, until the next century. [37] [61] Leonardo'
heir painting, however, nor the de Predis their payment, until the next century. [37] [61] Leonardo's most remarkable portrait of this period is the Lady with an Ermine , presumed to be Cecilia Gallerani ( c. 1483–1490 ), lover of Ludovico Sforza. [113] [114] The painting is characterised by the pose of the figure with the head turned at a very different angle to the torso, unusual at a date when many portraits were still rigidly in profile. The ermine plainly carries symbolic meaning, relating 
many portraits were still rigidly in profile. The ermine plainly carries symbolic meaning, relating either to the sitter, or to Ludovico who belonged to the prestigious Order of the Ermine . [113] Paintings of the 1490s The Last Supper , [d 7] Convent of Santa Maria delle Grazie , Milan ( c. 1492–1498 ) Leonardo's most famous painting of the 1490s is The Last Supper , commissioned for the refectory of the Convent of Santa Maria della Grazie in Milan. It represents the last meal shared by Jesus w
y of the Convent of Santa Maria della Grazie in Milan. It represents the last meal shared by Jesus with his disciples before his capture and death, and shows the moment when Jesus has just said "one of you will betray me", and the consternation that this statement caused. [37] The writer Matteo Bandello observed Leonardo at work and wrote that some days he would paint from dawn till dusk without stopping to eat and then not paint for three or four days at a time. [115] This was beyond the compre
topping to eat and then not paint for three or four days at a time. [115] This was beyond the comprehension of the prior of the convent, who hounded him until Leonardo asked Ludovico to intervene. Vasari describes how Leonardo, troubled over his ability to adequately depict the faces of Christ and the traitor Judas , told the duke that he might be obliged to use the prior as his model. [‡ 7] The painting was acclaimed as a masterpiece of design and characterisation, [‡ 8] but it deteriorated rap
ainting was acclaimed as a masterpiece of design and characterisation, [‡ 8] but it deteriorated rapidly, so that within a hundred years it was described by one viewer as "completely ruined." [116] Leonardo, instead of using the reliable technique of fresco, had used tempera over a ground that was mainly gesso , resulting in a surface subject to mould and to flaking. [117] Despite this, the painting remains one of the most reproduced works of art; countless copies have been made in various mediu
ng remains one of the most reproduced works of art; countless copies have been made in various mediums. Toward the end of this period, in 1498 Leonardo's trompe-l'œil decoration of the Sala delle Asse was painted for the Duke of Milan in the Castello Sforzesco . Paintings of the 1500s In 1505, Leonardo was commissioned to paint The Battle of Anghiari in the Salone dei Cinquecento (Hall of the Five Hundred) in the Palazzo Vecchio , Florence. Leonardo devised a dynamic composition depicting four m
 Hundred) in the Palazzo Vecchio , Florence. Leonardo devised a dynamic composition depicting four men riding raging war horses engaged in a battle for possession of a standard, at the Battle of Anghiari in 1440. Michelangelo was assigned the opposite wall to depict the Battle of Cascina . Leonardo's painting deteriorated rapidly and is now known from a copy by Rubens . [118] Mona Lisa or La Gioconda c. 1503–1516 , [d 8] Louvre , Paris Among the works created by Leonardo in the 16th century is t
nda c. 1503–1516 , [d 8] Louvre , Paris Among the works created by Leonardo in the 16th century is the small portrait known as the Mona Lisa or La Gioconda , the laughing one. In the present era, it is arguably the most famous painting in the world. Its fame rests, in particular, on the elusive smile on the woman's face, its mysterious quality perhaps due to the subtly shadowed corners of the mouth and eyes such that the exact nature of the smile cannot be determined. The shadowy quality for whi
h and eyes such that the exact nature of the smile cannot be determined. The shadowy quality for which the work is renowned came to be called " sfumato ", or Leonardo's smoke. Vasari wrote that the smile was "so pleasing that it seems more divine than human, and it was considered a wondrous thing that it was as lively as the smile of the living original." [‡ 9] Other characteristics of the painting are the unadorned dress, in which the eyes and hands have no competition from other details; the d
g are the unadorned dress, in which the eyes and hands have no competition from other details; the dramatic landscape background, in which the world seems to be in a state of flux; the subdued colouring; and the extremely smooth nature of the painterly technique, employing oils laid on much like tempera , and blended on the surface so that the brushstrokes are indistinguishable. [119] Vasari expressed that the painting's quality would make even "the most confident master ... despair and lose hea
ssed that the painting's quality would make even "the most confident master ... despair and lose heart." [‡ 10] The perfect state of preservation and the fact that there is no sign of repair or overpainting is rare in a panel painting of this date. [120] In the painting Virgin and Child with Saint Anne , the composition again picks up the theme of figures in a landscape, which Wasserman describes as "breathtakingly beautiful" [121] and harkens back to the Saint Jerome with the figure set at an o
as "breathtakingly beautiful" [121] and harkens back to the Saint Jerome with the figure set at an oblique angle. What makes this painting unusual is that there are two obliquely set figures superimposed. Mary is seated on the knee of her mother, Saint Anne. She leans forward to restrain the Christ Child as he plays roughly with a lamb, the sign of his own impending sacrifice. [37] This painting, which was copied many times, influenced Michelangelo, Raphael, and Andrea del Sarto , [122] and thro
which was copied many times, influenced Michelangelo, Raphael, and Andrea del Sarto , [122] and through them Pontormo and Correggio . The trends in composition were adopted in particular by the Venetian painters Tintoretto and Veronese . Drawings Antique Warrior in Profile , c. 1472 . British Museum, London Presumed self-portrait of Leonardo ( c. 1510 ) at the Royal Library of Turin , Italy Leonardo was a prolific draughtsman, keeping journals full of small sketches and detailed drawings recordi
do was a prolific draughtsman, keeping journals full of small sketches and detailed drawings recording all manner of things that took his attention. As well as the journals there exist many studies for paintings, some of which can be identified as preparatory to particular works such as The Adoration of the Magi , The Virgin of the Rocks and The Last Supper . [123] His earliest dated drawing is a Landscape of the Arno Valley , 1473, which shows the river, the mountains, Montelupo Castle and the 
Landscape of the Arno Valley , 1473, which shows the river, the mountains, Montelupo Castle and the farmlands beyond it in great detail. [36] [123] [y] Among his famous drawings are the Vitruvian Man , a study of the proportions of the human body; the Head of an Angel , for The Virgin of the Rocks in the Louvre ; a botanical study of Star of Bethlehem ; and a large drawing (160×100 cm) in black chalk on coloured paper of The Virgin and Child with Saint Anne and Saint John the Baptist in the Nati
alk on coloured paper of The Virgin and Child with Saint Anne and Saint John the Baptist in the National Gallery, London. [123] This drawing employs the subtle sfumato technique of shading, in the manner of the Mona Lisa . It is thought that Leonardo never made a painting from it, the closest similarity being to The Virgin and Child with Saint Anne in the Louvre. [124] Other drawings of interest include numerous studies generally referred to as "caricatures" because, although exaggerated, they a
nclude numerous studies generally referred to as "caricatures" because, although exaggerated, they appear to be based upon observation of live models. Vasari relates that Leonardo would look for interesting faces in public to use as models for some of his work. [‡ 7] There are numerous studies of beautiful young men, often associated with Salaì, with the rare and much admired facial feature, the so-called "Grecian profile". [z] These faces are often contrasted with that of a warrior. [123] Salaì
o-called "Grecian profile". [z] These faces are often contrasted with that of a warrior. [123] Salaì is often depicted in fancy-dress costume. Leonardo is known to have designed sets for pageants with which these may be associated. Other, often meticulous, drawings show studies of drapery. A marked development in Leonardo's ability to draw drapery occurred in his early works. Another often-reproduced drawing is a macabre sketch that was done by Leonardo in Florence in 1479 showing the body of Be
ced drawing is a macabre sketch that was done by Leonardo in Florence in 1479 showing the body of Bernardo Baroncelli , hanged in connection with the murder of Giuliano , brother of Lorenzo de' Medici, in the Pazzi conspiracy . [123] In his notes, Leonardo recorded the colours of the robes that Baroncelli was wearing when he died. Like the two contemporary architects Donato Bramante (who designed the Belvedere Courtyard ) and Antonio da Sangallo the Elder , Leonardo experimented with designs for
the Belvedere Courtyard ) and Antonio da Sangallo the Elder , Leonardo experimented with designs for centrally planned churches, a number of which appear in his journals, as both plans and views, although none was ever realised. [40] [125] Journals and notes See also: List of works by Leonardo da Vinci § Manuscripts Renaissance humanism recognised no mutually exclusive polarities between the sciences and the arts, and Leonardo's studies in science and engineering are sometimes considered as impr
ces and the arts, and Leonardo's studies in science and engineering are sometimes considered as impressive and innovative as his artistic work. [37] These studies were recorded in 13,000 pages of notes and drawings, which fuse art and natural philosophy (the forerunner of modern science). They were made and maintained daily throughout Leonardo's life and travels, as he made continual observations of the world around him. [37] Leonardo's notes and drawings display an enormous range of interests a
of the world around him. [37] Leonardo's notes and drawings display an enormous range of interests and preoccupations, some as mundane as lists of groceries and people who owed him money and some as intriguing as designs for wings and shoes for walking on water. There are compositions for paintings, studies of details and drapery, studies of faces and emotions, of animals, babies, dissections, plant studies, rock formations, whirlpools, war machines, flying machines and architecture. [37] A page
nt studies, rock formations, whirlpools, war machines, flying machines and architecture. [37] A page showing Leonardo's study of a foetus in the womb ( c. 1510 ), Royal Library, Windsor Castle These notebooks –  originally loose papers of different types and sizes –  were largely entrusted to Leonardo's pupil and heir Francesco Melzi after the master's death. [126] These were to be published, a task of overwhelming difficulty because of its scope and Leonardo's idiosyncratic writing. [127] Some 
sk of overwhelming difficulty because of its scope and Leonardo's idiosyncratic writing. [127] Some of Leonardo's drawings were copied by an anonymous Milanese artist for a planned treatise on art c. 1570 . [128] After Melzi's death in 1570, the collection passed to his son, the lawyer Orazio, who initially took little interest in the journals. [126] In 1587, a Melzi household tutor named Lelio Gavardi took 13 of the manuscripts to Pisa; there, the architect Giovanni Magenta reproached Gavardi f
vardi took 13 of the manuscripts to Pisa; there, the architect Giovanni Magenta reproached Gavardi for having taken the manuscripts illicitly and returned them to Orazio. Having many more such works in his possession, Orazio gifted the volumes to Magenta. News spread of these lost works of Leonardo's, and Orazio retrieved seven of the 13 manuscripts, which he then gave to Pompeo Leoni for publication in two volumes; one of these was the Codex Atlanticus . The other six works had been distributed
ion in two volumes; one of these was the Codex Atlanticus . The other six works had been distributed to a few others. [129] After Orazio's death, his heirs sold the rest of Leonardo's possessions, and thus began their dispersal. [130] Some works have found their way into major collections such as the Royal Library at Windsor Castle , the Louvre, the Biblioteca Nacional de España , the Victoria and Albert Museum , the Biblioteca Ambrosiana in Milan, which holds the 12-volume Codex Atlanticus, and
 Albert Museum , the Biblioteca Ambrosiana in Milan, which holds the 12-volume Codex Atlanticus, and the British Library in London, which has put a selection from the Codex Arundel (BL Arundel MS 263) online. [131] Works have also been at Holkham Hall , the Metropolitan Museum of Art , and in the private hands of John Nicholas Brown I and Robert Lehman . [126] The Codex Leicester is the only privately owned major scientific work of Leonardo; it is owned by Bill Gates and displayed once a year in
tely owned major scientific work of Leonardo; it is owned by Bill Gates and displayed once a year in different cities around the world. Most of Leonardo's writings are in mirror-image cursive. [45] [132] Since Leonardo wrote with his left hand, it was probably easier for him to write from right to left. [133] [aa] Leonardo used a variety of shorthand and symbols, and states in his notes that he intended to prepare them for publication. [132] In many cases a single topic is covered in detail in b
tended to prepare them for publication. [132] In many cases a single topic is covered in detail in both words and pictures on a single sheet, together conveying information that would not be lost if the pages were published out of order. [136] Why they were not published during Leonardo's lifetime is unknown. [37] Science and inventions Main article: Science and inventions of Leonardo da Vinci Rhombicuboctahedron as published in Pacioli's Divina proportione (1509) Leonardo's approach to science 
mbicuboctahedron as published in Pacioli's Divina proportione (1509) Leonardo's approach to science was observational: he tried to understand a phenomenon by describing and depicting it in utmost detail and did not emphasise experiments or theoretical explanation. Since he lacked formal education in Latin and mathematics, contemporary scholars mostly ignored Leonardo the scientist, although he did teach himself Latin. His keen observations in many areas were noted, such as when he wrote "Il sole
 teach himself Latin. His keen observations in many areas were noted, such as when he wrote "Il sole non si move." ("The Sun does not move.") [137] In the 1490s he studied mathematics under Luca Pacioli and prepared a series of drawings of regular solids in a skeletal form to be engraved as plates for Pacioli's book Divina proportione , published in 1509. [37] While living in Milan, he studied light from the summit of Monte Rosa . [69] Scientific writings in his notebook on fossils have been con
ht from the summit of Monte Rosa . [69] Scientific writings in his notebook on fossils have been considered as influential on early palaeontology . [138] The content of his journals suggest that he was planning a series of treatises on a variety of subjects. A coherent treatise on anatomy is said to have been observed during a visit by Cardinal Louis d'Aragon's secretary in 1517. [139] Aspects of his work on the studies of anatomy, light and the landscape were assembled for publication by Melzi 
his work on the studies of anatomy, light and the landscape were assembled for publication by Melzi and eventually published as A Treatise on Painting in France and Italy in 1651 and Germany in 1724, [140] with engravings based upon drawings by the Classical painter Nicolas Poussin . [4] According to Arasse, the treatise, which in France went into 62 editions in fifty years, caused Leonardo to be seen as "the precursor of French academic thought on art." [37] While Leonardo's experimentation fol
seen as "the precursor of French academic thought on art." [37] While Leonardo's experimentation followed scientific methods, a recent and exhaustive analysis of Leonardo as a scientist by Fritjof Capra argues that Leonardo was a fundamentally different kind of scientist from Galileo , Newton and other scientists who followed him in that, as a " Renaissance Man ", his theorising and hypothesising integrated the arts and particularly painting. [141] Anatomy and physiology Anatomical study of the 
integrated the arts and particularly painting. [141] Anatomy and physiology Anatomical study of the arm ( c. 1510 ) Leonardo's physiological sketch of the human brain and skull ( c. 1510 ) Leonardo started his study in the anatomy of the human body under the apprenticeship of Verrocchio, who demanded that his students develop a deep knowledge of the subject. As an artist, he quickly became master of topographic anatomy , drawing many studies of muscles , tendons and other visible anatomical feat
of topographic anatomy , drawing many studies of muscles , tendons and other visible anatomical features. [ citation needed ] As a successful artist, Leonardo was given permission to dissect human corpses at the Hospital of Santa Maria Nuova in Florence and later at hospitals in Milan and Rome. From 1510 to 1511 he collaborated in his studies with the doctor Marcantonio della Torre , professor of Anatomy at the University of Pavia . [142] Leonardo made over 240 detailed drawings and wrote about 
Anatomy at the University of Pavia . [142] Leonardo made over 240 detailed drawings and wrote about 13,000 words toward a treatise on anatomy. [143] Only a small amount of the material on anatomy was published in Leonardo's Treatise on painting . [127] During the time that Melzi was ordering the material into chapters for publication, they were examined by a number of anatomists and artists, including Vasari , Cellini and Albrecht Dürer , who made a number of drawings from them. [127] Leonardo's
ding Vasari , Cellini and Albrecht Dürer , who made a number of drawings from them. [127] Leonardo's anatomical drawings include many studies of the human skeleton and its parts, and of muscles and sinews. He studied the mechanical functions of the skeleton and the muscular forces that are applied to it in a manner that prefigured the modern science of biomechanics . [144] He drew the heart and vascular system , the sex organs and other internal organs, making one of the first scientific drawing
scular system , the sex organs and other internal organs, making one of the first scientific drawings of a fetus in utero . [123] The drawings and notation are far ahead of their time, and if published would undoubtedly have made a major contribution to medical science. [143] Leonardo also closely observed and recorded the effects of age and of human emotion on the physiology, studying in particular the effects of rage. He drew many figures who had significant facial deformities or signs of illn
ar the effects of rage. He drew many figures who had significant facial deformities or signs of illness. [37] [123] Leonardo also studied and drew the anatomy of many animals, dissecting cows, birds, monkeys, bears, and frogs, and comparing in his drawings their anatomical structure with that of humans. He also made a number of studies of horses. [123] Leonardo's dissections and documentation of muscles, nerves, and vessels helped to describe the physiology and mechanics of movement. He attempte
uscles, nerves, and vessels helped to describe the physiology and mechanics of movement. He attempted to identify the source of 'emotions' and their expression. He found it difficult to incorporate the prevailing system and theories of bodily humours , but eventually he abandoned these physiological explanations of bodily functions. He made the observations that humours were not located in cerebral spaces or ventricles . He documented that the humours were not contained in the heart or the liver
l spaces or ventricles . He documented that the humours were not contained in the heart or the liver, and that it was the heart that defined the circulatory system. He was the first to define atherosclerosis and liver cirrhosis . He created models of the cerebral ventricles with the use of melted wax and constructed a glass aorta to observe the circulation of blood through the aortic valve by using water and grass seed to watch flow patterns. [145] Engineering and inventions A design for a flyin
g water and grass seed to watch flow patterns. [145] Engineering and inventions A design for a flying machine ( c. 1488 ), first presented in the Codex on the Flight of Birds An aerial screw ( c. 1489 ), suggestive of a helicopter, from the Codex Atlanticus During his lifetime, Leonardo was also valued as an engineer. With the same rational and analytical approach that moved him to represent the human body and to investigate anatomy, Leonardo studied and designed many machines and devices. He dr
uman body and to investigate anatomy, Leonardo studied and designed many machines and devices. He drew their "anatomy" with unparalleled mastery, producing the first form of the modern technical drawing, including a perfected "exploded view" technique, to represent internal components. Those studies and projects collected in his codices fill more than 5,000 pages. [146] In a letter of 1482 to the lord of Milan Ludovico il Moro , he wrote that he could create all sorts of machines both for the pr
lord of Milan Ludovico il Moro , he wrote that he could create all sorts of machines both for the protection of a city and for siege. When he fled from Milan to Venice in 1499, he found employment as an engineer and devised a system of moveable barricades to protect the city from attack. In 1502, he created a scheme for diverting the flow of the Arno river, a project on which Niccolò Machiavelli also worked. [147] [148] He continued to contemplate the canalisation of Lombardy's plains while in L
lso worked. [147] [148] He continued to contemplate the canalisation of Lombardy's plains while in Louis XII's company [69] and of the Loire and its tributaries in the company of Francis I. [149] Leonardo's journals include a vast number of inventions, both practical and impractical. They include musical instruments , a mechanical knight , hydraulic pumps, reversible crank mechanisms, finned mortar shells, and a steam cannon . [36] [37] Leonardo's drawings of a scythed chariot and a fighting veh
r shells, and a steam cannon . [36] [37] Leonardo's drawings of a scythed chariot and a fighting vehicle Leonardo was fascinated by the phenomenon of flight for much of his life, producing many studies, including Codex on the Flight of Birds ( c. 1505 ), as well as plans for several flying machines, such as a flapping ornithopter and a machine with a helical rotor . [37] In a 2003 documentary by British television station Channel Four , titled Leonardo's Dream Machines , various designs by Leona
ritish television station Channel Four , titled Leonardo's Dream Machines , various designs by Leonardo, such as a parachute and a giant crossbow , were interpreted and constructed. [150] [151] Some of those designs proved successful, whilst others fared less well when tested. Similarly, a team of engineers built ten machines designed by Leonardo in the 2009 American television series Doing DaVinci , including a fighting vehicle and a self-propelled cart . Research performed by Marc van den Broe
i , including a fighting vehicle and a self-propelled cart . Research performed by Marc van den Broek revealed older prototypes for more than 100 inventions that are ascribed to Leonardo. Similarities between Leonardo's illustrations and drawings from the Middle Ages and from Ancient Greece and Rome, the Chinese and Persian Empires, and Egypt suggest that a large portion of Leonardo's inventions had been conceived before his lifetime. Leonardo's innovation was to combine different functions from
ad been conceived before his lifetime. Leonardo's innovation was to combine different functions from existing drafts and set them into scenes that illustrated their utility. By reconstituting technical inventions he created something new. [152] In his notebooks, Leonardo first stated the 'laws' of sliding friction in 1493. [153] His inspiration for investigating friction came about in part from his study of perpetual motion , which he correctly concluded was not possible. [154] His results were 
s study of perpetual motion , which he correctly concluded was not possible. [154] His results were never published and the friction laws were not rediscovered until 1699 by Guillaume Amontons , with whose name they are now usually associated. [‡ 7] For this contribution, Leonardo was named as the first of the 23 "Men of Tribology" by Duncan Dowson . [155] Legacy Further information: Cultural references to Leonardo da Vinci and List of things named after Leonardo da Vinci Statue outside the Uffi
rences to Leonardo da Vinci and List of things named after Leonardo da Vinci Statue outside the Uffizi , Florence, by Luigi Pampaloni (1791–1847) Although he had no formal academic training, [156] many historians and scholars regard Leonardo as the prime exemplar of the " Universal Genius " or "Renaissance Man", an individual of "unquenchable curiosity" and "feverishly inventive imagination." [157] He is widely considered one of the most diversely talented individuals ever to have lived. [158] A
] He is widely considered one of the most diversely talented individuals ever to have lived. [158] According to art historian Helen Gardner , the scope and depth of his interests were without precedent in recorded history, and "his mind and personality seem to us superhuman, while the man himself mysterious and remote." [157] Scholars interpret his view of the world as being based in logic, though the empirical methods he used were unorthodox for his time. [159] Leonardo's fame within his own li
 the empirical methods he used were unorthodox for his time. [159] Leonardo's fame within his own lifetime was such that the King of France carried him away like a trophy, and was claimed to have supported him in his old age and held him in his arms as he died. Interest in Leonardo and his work has never diminished. Crowds still queue to see his best-known artworks, T-shirts still bear his most famous drawing, and writers continue to hail him as a genius while speculating about his private life,
mous drawing, and writers continue to hail him as a genius while speculating about his private life, as well as about what one so intelligent actually believed in. [37] The continued admiration that Leonardo commanded from painters, critics and historians is reflected in many other written tributes. Baldassare Castiglione , author of Il Cortegiano ( The Courtier ), wrote in 1528: "...Another of the greatest painters in this world looks down on this art in which he is unequalled..." [160] while t
e greatest painters in this world looks down on this art in which he is unequalled..." [160] while the biographer known as "Anonimo Gaddiano" wrote, c. 1540 : "His genius was so rare and universal that it can be said that nature worked a miracle on his behalf..." [161] Vasari, in his Lives of the Artists (1568), opens his chapter on Leonardo: [‡ 11] In the normal course of events many men and women are born with remarkable talents; but occasionally, in a way that transcends nature, a single pers
n are born with remarkable talents; but occasionally, in a way that transcends nature, a single person is marvellously endowed by Heaven with beauty, grace and talent in such abundance that he leaves other men far behind, all his actions seem inspired and indeed everything he does clearly comes from God rather than from human skill. Everyone acknowledged that this was true of Leonardo da Vinci, an artist of outstanding physical beauty, who displayed infinite grace in everything that he did and w
 artist of outstanding physical beauty, who displayed infinite grace in everything that he did and who cultivated his genius so brilliantly that all problems he studied he solved with ease. The Death of Leonardo da Vinci , by Ingres , 1818 [u] The 19th century brought a particular admiration for Leonardo's genius, causing Henry Fuseli to write in 1801: "Such was the dawn of modern art, when Leonardo da Vinci broke forth with a splendour that distanced former excellence: made up of all the elemen
do da Vinci broke forth with a splendour that distanced former excellence: made up of all the elements that constitute the essence of genius..." [162] This is echoed by A. E. Rio who wrote in 1861: "He towered above all other artists through the strength and the nobility of his talents." [163] By the 19th century, the scope of Leonardo's notebooks was known, as well as his paintings. Hippolyte Taine wrote in 1866: "There may not be in the world an example of another genius so universal, so incap
ne wrote in 1866: "There may not be in the world an example of another genius so universal, so incapable of fulfilment, so full of yearning for the infinite, so naturally refined, so far ahead of his own century and the following centuries." [164] Art historian Bernard Berenson wrote in 1896: Leonardo is the one artist of whom it may be said with perfect literalness: Nothing that he touched but turned into a thing of eternal beauty. Whether it be the cross section of a skull, the structure of a 
rned into a thing of eternal beauty. Whether it be the cross section of a skull, the structure of a weed, or a study of muscles, he, with his feeling for line and for light and shade, forever transmuted it into life-communicating values. [165] The interest in Leonardo's genius has continued unabated; experts study and translate his writings, analyse his paintings using scientific techniques, argue over attributions and search for works which have been recorded but never found. [166] Liana Bortol
 over attributions and search for works which have been recorded but never found. [166] Liana Bortolon, writing in 1967, said: Because of the multiplicity of interests that spurred him to pursue every field of knowledge...Leonardo can be considered, quite rightly, to have been the universal genius par excellence, and with all the disquieting overtones inherent in that term. Man is as uncomfortable today, faced with a genius, as he was in the 16th century. Five centuries have passed, yet we still
 today, faced with a genius, as he was in the 16th century. Five centuries have passed, yet we still view Leonardo with awe. [36] The Elmer Belt Library of Vinciana is a special collection at the University of California, Los Angeles . [167] Leonardo Museum in Vinci , which houses a large collection of models constructed on the basis of Leonardo's drawings Twenty-first-century author Walter Isaacson based much of his biography of Leonardo [104] on thousands of notebook entries, studying the pers
on based much of his biography of Leonardo [104] on thousands of notebook entries, studying the personal notes, sketches, budget notations, and musings of the man whom he considers the greatest of innovators. Isaacson was surprised to discover a "fun, joyous" side of Leonardo in addition to his limitless curiosity and creative genius. [168] On the 500th anniversary of Leonardo's death, the Louvre in Paris arranged for the largest ever single exhibit of his work, called Leonardo , between Novembe
in Paris arranged for the largest ever single exhibit of his work, called Leonardo , between November 2019 and February 2020. The exhibit includes over 100 paintings, drawings and notebooks. Eleven of the paintings that Leonardo completed in his lifetime were included. Five of these are owned by the Louvre, but the Mona Lisa was not included because it is in such great demand among general visitors to the Louvre; it remains on display in its gallery. Vitruvian Man , however, is on display follow
s to the Louvre; it remains on display in its gallery. Vitruvian Man , however, is on display following a legal battle with its owner, the Gallerie dell'Accademia in Venice. Salvator Mundi [ab] was also not included because its Saudi owner did not agree to lease the work. [171] [172] The Mona Lisa , considered Leonardo's magnum opus , is often regarded as the most famous portrait ever made. [3] [173] The Last Supper is the most reproduced religious painting of all time, [157] and Leonardo's Vitr
73] The Last Supper is the most reproduced religious painting of all time, [157] and Leonardo's Vitruvian Man drawing is also considered a cultural icon . [174] More than a decade of analysis of Leonardo's genetic genealogy , conducted by Alessandro Vezzosi and Agnese Sabato, came to a conclusion in mid-2021. It was determined that the artist has 14 living male relatives. The work could also help determine the authenticity of remains thought to belong to Leonardo. [175] Location of remains Tomb 
determine the authenticity of remains thought to belong to Leonardo. [175] Location of remains Tomb in the chapel of Saint Hubert at the Château d'Amboise where a plaque describes it as the presumed site of Leonardo's remains While Leonardo was certainly buried in the collegiate church of Saint Florentin at the Château d'Amboise in 12 August 1519, the current location of his remains is unclear. [176] [177] Much of Château d'Amboise was damaged during the French Revolution , leading to the church
76] [177] Much of Château d'Amboise was damaged during the French Revolution , leading to the church's demolition in 1802. [176] Some of the graves were destroyed in the process, scattering the bones interred there and thereby leaving the whereabouts of Leonardo's remains subject to dispute; a gardener may have even buried some in the corner of the courtyard. [176] In 1863, fine-arts inspector general Arsène Houssaye received an imperial commission to excavate the site and discovered a partially
eral Arsène Houssaye received an imperial commission to excavate the site and discovered a partially complete skeleton with a bronze ring on one finger, white hair, and stone fragments bearing the inscriptions "EO", "AR", "DUS", and "VINC" –  interpreted as forming "Leonardus Vinci". [93] [176] [178] The skull's eight teeth correspond to someone of approximately the appropriate age, and a silver shield found near the bones depicts a beardless Francis I , corresponding to the king's appearance du
hield found near the bones depicts a beardless Francis I , corresponding to the king's appearance during Leonardo's time in France. [178] Houssaye postulated that the unusually large skull was an indicator of Leonardo's intelligence; author Charles Nicholl describes this as a "dubious phrenological deduction". [176] At the same time, Houssaye noted some issues with his observations, including that the feet were turned toward the high altar , a practice generally reserved for laymen , and that th
 the feet were turned toward the high altar , a practice generally reserved for laymen , and that the skeleton of 1.73 metres (5.7 ft) seemed too short. [178] [ failed verification – see discussion ] Art historian Mary Margaret Heaton wrote in 1874 that the height would be appropriate for Leonardo. [179] The skull was allegedly presented to Napoleon III before being returned to the Château d'Amboise, where they were re-interred in the chapel of Saint Hubert in 1874. [178] [180] A plaque above th
se, where they were re-interred in the chapel of Saint Hubert in 1874. [178] [180] A plaque above the tomb states that its contents are only presumed to be those of Leonardo. [177] It has since been theorised that the folding of the skeleton's right arm over the head may correspond to the paralysis of Leonardo's right hand. [82] [88] [178] In 2016, it was announced that DNA tests would be conducted to determine whether the attribution is correct. [180] The DNA of the remains will be compared to 
d to determine whether the attribution is correct. [180] The DNA of the remains will be compared to that of samples collected from Leonardo's work and his half-brother Domenico's descendants; [180] it may also be sequenced . [181] In 2019, documents were published revealing that Houssaye had kept the ring and a lock of hair. In 1925, his great-grandson sold these to an American collector. Sixty years later, another American acquired them, leading to their being displayed at the Leonardo Museum i
ars later, another American acquired them, leading to their being displayed at the Leonardo Museum in Vinci beginning on 2 May 2019, the 500th anniversary of the artist's death. [93] [182] Notes General ^ a b See Nicholl (2005 , pp. 17–20) and Bambach (2019 , p. 24) for further information on the dispute and uncertainty surrounding Leonardo's exact birthplace. ^ a b / ˌ l iː ə ˈ n ɑːr d oʊ d ə ˈ v ɪ n tʃ i , ˌ l iː oʊ ˈ -, ˌ l eɪ oʊ ˈ -/ LEE -ə- NAR -doh də VIN -chee, LEE -oh-, LAY -oh- , Italia
 ɪ n tʃ i , ˌ l iː oʊ ˈ -, ˌ l eɪ oʊ ˈ -/ LEE -ə- NAR -doh də VIN -chee, LEE -oh-, LAY -oh- , Italian: [leoˈnardo di ˌsɛr ˈpjɛːro da (v)ˈvintʃi] ⓘ . ^ The inclusion of the title ser (shortening of Italian messer or messere , title of courtesy prefixed to the first name) indicates that Leonardo's father was a gentleman (a low-ranking nobleman). ^ The diary of his paternal grandfather Ser Antonio relays a precise account: "There was born to me a grandson, son of Ser Piero [ fr ] , on 15 April, a S
lays a precise account: "There was born to me a grandson, son of Ser Piero [ fr ] , on 15 April, a Saturday, at the third hour of the night." [13] [14] Ser Antonio records Leonardo being baptised the following day by Piero di Bartolomeo at the parish of Santa Croce [ it ] . [15] ^ It has been suggested that Caterina may have been a slave from the Middle East "or at least, from the Mediterranean" or even of Chinese descent. According to art critic Alessandro Vezzosi , head of the Leonardo Museum 
r even of Chinese descent. According to art critic Alessandro Vezzosi , head of the Leonardo Museum in Vinci , there is evidence that Piero owned a slave called Caterina. [19] The reconstruction of one of Leonardo's fingerprints shows a pattern that matches 60% of people of Middle Eastern origin, suggesting the possibility that Leonardo may have had Middle Eastern blood. The claim is refuted by Simon Cole, associate professor of criminology, law and society at the University of California at Irv
mon Cole, associate professor of criminology, law and society at the University of California at Irvine: "You can't predict one person's race from these kinds of incidences, especially if looking at only one finger". More recently, historian Martin Kemp , after digging through overlooked archives and records in Italy, found evidence that Leonardo's mother was a young local woman identified as Caterina di Meo Lippi. [20] ^ See Kemp & Pallanti (2017 , pp. 65–66) for detailed table on Ser Piero's m
rina di Meo Lippi. [20] ^ See Kemp & Pallanti (2017 , pp. 65–66) for detailed table on Ser Piero's marriages. ^ He also never wrote about his father, except a passing note of his death in which he overstates his age by three years. [25] Leonardo's siblings caused him difficulty after his father's death in a dispute over their inheritance. [26] ^ The humanist influence of Donatello's David can be seen in Leonardo's late paintings, particularly John the Baptist . [34] [33] ^ The "diverse arts" and
een in Leonardo's late paintings, particularly John the Baptist . [34] [33] ^ The "diverse arts" and technical skills of Medieval and Renaissance workshops are described in detail in the 12th-century text On Divers Arts by Theophilus Presbyter and in the early 15th-century text Il Libro Dell'arte O Trattato Della Pittui by Cennino Cennini . ^ That Leonardo joined the guild by this time is deduced from the record of payment made to the Compagnia di San Luca in the company's register, Libro Rosso 
from the record of payment made to the Compagnia di San Luca in the company's register, Libro Rosso A, 1472–1520, Accademia di Belle Arti. [14] ^ On the back he wrote: "I, staying with Anthony, am happy," possibly in reference to his father. ^ Leonardo later wrote in the margin of a journal, "The Medici made me and the Medici destroyed me." [36] ^ In 2005, the studio was rediscovered during the restoration of part of a building occupied for 100 years by the Department of Military Geography. [62]
storation of part of a building occupied for 100 years by the Department of Military Geography. [62] ^ Both works are lost. The entire composition of Michelangelo's painting is known from a copy by Aristotole da Sangallo, 1542. [67] Leonardo's painting is known only from preparatory sketches and several copies of the centre section, of which the best known, and probably least accurate, is by Peter Paul Rubens . [68] ^ Pope Leo X is quoted as saying, "This man will never accomplish anything! He t
 Paul Rubens . [68] ^ Pope Leo X is quoted as saying, "This man will never accomplish anything! He thinks of the end before the beginning!" [74] ^ There is no documentary basis for the frequently made claim that Leonardo was present at the meeting between Francis I and Leo X, which took place in Bologna from 11 to 14 December 1516. [77] ^ It is unknown for what occasion the mechanical lion was made, but it is believed to have greeted the King at his entry into Lyon and perhaps was used for the p
e, but it is believed to have greeted the King at his entry into Lyon and perhaps was used for the peace talks between the French king and Pope Leo X in Bologna. A conjectural recreation of the lion has been made and is on display in the Museum of Bologna. [80] ^ Identified via its similarity to Leonardo's presumed self-portrait . [83] ^ "... Messer Lunardo Vinci  [ sic ] ... an old graybeard of more than 70 years ... showed His Excellency three pictures ... from whom, since he was then subject 
ore than 70 years ... showed His Excellency three pictures ... from whom, since he was then subject to a certain paralysis of the right hand, one could not expect any more good work." [84] ^ This scene is portrayed in romantic paintings by Ingres , Ménageot and other French artists, as well as Angelica Kauffman . ^ a b On the day of Leonardo's death, a royal edict was issued by the King at Saint-Germain-en-Laye , a two-day journey from Clos Lucé. This has been taken as evidence that King Francis
ermain-en-Laye , a two-day journey from Clos Lucé. This has been taken as evidence that King Francis cannot have been present at Leonardo's deathbed, but the edict was not signed by the King. [91] ^ Each of the sixty paupers were to have been awarded in accord with Leonardo's will. [50] ^ These qualities of Leonardo's works are discussed in Hartt (1970 , pp. 387–411) ^ The painting, which in the 18th century belonged to Angelica Kauffman , was later cut up. The two main sections were found in a 
8th century belonged to Angelica Kauffman , was later cut up. The two main sections were found in a junk shop and cobbler's shop and were reunited. [110] It is probable that outer parts of the composition are missing. ^ This work is now in the collection of the Uffizi , Drawing No. 8P. ^ The "Grecian profile" has a continuous straight line from forehead to nose-tip, the bridge of the nose being exceptionally high. It is a feature of many Classical Greek statues. ^ He also drew with his left hand
ceptionally high. It is a feature of many Classical Greek statues. ^ He also drew with his left hand, his hatch strokes "slanting down from left to right –  the natural stroke of a left-handed artist". [134] He also sometimes wrote conventionally with his right hand. [135] ^ Salvator Mundi , a painting by Leonardo depicting Jesus holding an orb, sold for a world record US$450.3 million at a Christie's auction in New York, 15 November 2017. [169] The highest known sale price for any artwork was p
ie's auction in New York, 15 November 2017. [169] The highest known sale price for any artwork was previously US$300 million, for Willem de Kooning 's Interchange , which was sold privately in September 2015. [170] The highest price previously paid for a work of art at auction was for Pablo Picasso 's Les Femmes d'Alger , which sold for US$179.4 million in May 2015 at Christie's New York. [170] Dates of works ^ The Adoration of the Magi Kemp (2019 , p. 27): c. 1481–1482 Marani (2003 , p. 338): 1
tes of works ^ The Adoration of the Magi Kemp (2019 , p. 27): c. 1481–1482 Marani (2003 , p. 338): 1481 Syson et al. (2011 , p. 56): c. 1480–1482 Zöllner (2019 , p. 222): 1481/1482 ^ Virgin of the Rocks (Louvre version) Kemp (2019 , p. 41): c. 1483–1493 Marani (2003 , p. 339): between 1483 and 1486 Syson et al. (2011 , p. 164): 1483– c. 1485 Zöllner (2019 , p. 223): 1483–1484/1485 ^ Saint John the Baptist Kemp (2019 , p. 189): c. 1507–1514 Marani (2003 , p. 340): c. 1508 Syson et al. (2011 , p. 
 Baptist Kemp (2019 , p. 189): c. 1507–1514 Marani (2003 , p. 340): c. 1508 Syson et al. (2011 , p. 63): c. 1500 onwards Zöllner (2019 , p. 248): c. 1508–1516 ^ The Annunciation Kemp (2019 , p. 6): c. 1473–1474 Marani (2003 , p. 338): c. 1472–1475 Syson et al. (2011 , p. 15): c. 1472–1476 Zöllner (2019 , p. 216): c. 1473–1475 ^ Saint Jerome in the Wilderness Kemp (2019 , p. 31): c. 1481–1482 Marani (2003 , p. 338): probably c. 1480 Syson et al. (2011 , p. 139): c. 1488–1490 Zöllner (2019 , p. 22
i (2003 , p. 338): probably c. 1480 Syson et al. (2011 , p. 139): c. 1488–1490 Zöllner (2019 , p. 221): c. 1480–1482 ^ Lady with an Ermine Kemp (2019 , p. 49): c. 1491 Marani (2003 , p. 339): 1489–1490 Syson et al. (2011 , p. 111): c. 1489–1490 Zöllner (2019 , p. 226): 1489/1490 ^ The Last Supper Kemp (2019 , p. 67): c. 1495–1497 Marani (2003 , p. 339): between 1494 and 1498 Syson et al. (2011 , p. 252): 1492–1497/1498 Zöllner (2019 , p. 230): c. 1495–1498 ^ Mona Lisa Kemp (2019 , p. 127): c. 15
. 252): 1492–1497/1498 Zöllner (2019 , p. 230): c. 1495–1498 ^ Mona Lisa Kemp (2019 , p. 127): c. 1503–1515 Marani (2003 , p. 340): c. 1503–1504; 1513–1514 Syson et al. (2011 , p. 48): c. 1502 onward Zöllner (2019 , p. 240): c. 1503–1506; 1510 References Citations Early ^ Vasari 1991 , p. 287 ^ Vasari 1991 , pp. 287–289 ^ a b c Vasari 1991 , p. 293 ^ Vasari 1991 , p. 297 ^ Vasari 1991 , p. 284 ^ Vasari 1991 , p. 286 ^ a b c Vasari 1991 , p. 290 ^ Vasari 1991 , pp. 289–291 ^ Vasari 1991 , p. 294 
asari 1991 , p. 286 ^ a b c Vasari 1991 , p. 290 ^ Vasari 1991 , pp. 289–291 ^ Vasari 1991 , p. 294 ^ Vasari 1965 , p. 266 ^ Vasari 1965 , p. 255 Modern ^ "A portrait of Leonardo c. 1515–18" . Royal Collection Trust . Archived from the original on 23 November 2020 . Retrieved 26 September 2020 . ^ a b Zöllner 2019 , p. 20. ^ a b c d e f g Kemp 2003 . ^ a b c d Heydenreich 2020 . ^ Zöllner 2019 , p. 250. ^ Kaplan, Erez (1996). "Roberto Guatelli's Controversial Replica of Leonardo da Vinci's Addin
. 250. ^ Kaplan, Erez (1996). "Roberto Guatelli's Controversial Replica of Leonardo da Vinci's Adding Machine" . Archived from the original on 29 May 2011 . Retrieved 19 August 2013 . ^ Kaplan, E. (April 1997). "Anecdotes" . IEEE Annals of the History of Computing . 19 (2): 62–69. doi : 10.1109/MAHC.1997.586074 . ISSN 1058-6180 . Archived from the original on 11 July 2022 . Retrieved 9 July 2022 . ^ Capra 2007 , pp. 5–6. ^ Brown 1998 , p. 7. ^ Kemp 2006 , p. 1. ^ a b c d e f Brown 1998 , p. 5. ^
 ^ Capra 2007 , pp. 5–6. ^ Brown 1998 , p. 7. ^ Kemp 2006 , p. 1. ^ a b c d e f Brown 1998 , p. 5. ^ Nicholl 2005 , p. 17 . ^ Vezzosi 1997 , p. 13. ^ a b c d e f g Ottino della Chiesa 1967 , p. 83. ^ Nicholl 2005 , p. 20 . ^ Bambach 2019 , pp. 16, 24. ^ a b Marani 2003 , p. 13. ^ Bambach 2019 , p. 16. ^ Hooper, John (12 April 2008). "Da Vinci's mother was a slave, Italian study claims" . The Guardian . Archived from the original on 23 December 2019 . Retrieved 16 August 2015 . ^ Alberge, Dalya (
ian . Archived from the original on 23 December 2019 . Retrieved 16 August 2015 . ^ Alberge, Dalya (21 May 2017). "Tuscan archives yield up secrets of Leonardo's mystery mother" . The Guardian . Archived from the original on 10 May 2020 . Retrieved 5 June 2019 . ^ a b c Bambach 2019 , p. 24. ^ Nicholl 2005 , p. 18 . ^ Kemp & Pallanti 2017 , p. 65. ^ a b Kemp & Pallanti 2017 , pp. 65–66. ^ a b Wallace 1972 , p. 11. ^ Magnano 2007 , p. 138. ^ Brown 1998 , pp. 1, 5. ^ Marani 2003 , p. 12. ^ Brown 1
ace 1972 , p. 11. ^ Magnano 2007 , p. 138. ^ Brown 1998 , pp. 1, 5. ^ Marani 2003 , p. 12. ^ Brown 1998 , p. 175. ^ Nicholl 2005 , p. 28 . ^ Nicholl 2005 , p. 30 , 506 . ^ Nicholl 2005 , p. 30 . See p. 506 for the original Italian. ^ a b c Rosci 1977 , p. 13. ^ a b c Hartt 1970 , pp. 127–133. ^ Bacci, Mina (1978) [1963]. The Great Artists: Da Vinci . Translated by Tanguy, J. New York: Funk & Wagnalls. ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Bortolon 1967 . ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s Arasse 1998 .
lls. ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Bortolon 1967 . ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s Arasse 1998 . ^ Rosci 1977 , p. 27. ^ Martindale 1972 . ^ a b c d Rosci 1977 , pp. 9–20. ^ Piero della Francesca, On Perspective for Painting (De Prospectiva Pingendi) ^ a b Rachum, Ilan (1979). The Renaissance, an Illustrated Encyclopedia . ^ Ottino della Chiesa 1967 , p. 88. ^ Wallace 1972 , p. 13. ^ a b Polidoro, Massimo (2019). "The Mind of Leonardo da Vinci, Part 1". Skeptical Inquirer . 43 (2). Center fo
oro, Massimo (2019). "The Mind of Leonardo da Vinci, Part 1". Skeptical Inquirer . 43 (2). Center for Inquiry: 30–31. ^ Wallace 1972 , p. 15. ^ Clark, Kenneth; Kemp, Martin (26 November 2015). Leonardo da Vinci (Newition ed.). United Kingdom: Penguin. p. 45. ISBN 978-0-14-198237-3 . ^ a b Wasserman 1975 , pp. 77–78. ^ a b Wallace 1972 , pp. 53–54. ^ a b c Williamson 1974 . ^ Kemp 2011 . ^ Franz-Joachim Verspohl [ de ] , Michelangelo Buonarroti und Leonardo Da Vinci: Republikanischer Alltag und K
achim Verspohl [ de ] , Michelangelo Buonarroti und Leonardo Da Vinci: Republikanischer Alltag und Künstlerkonkurrenz in Florenz zwischen 1501 und 1505 (Wallstein Verlag, 2007), p. 151. ^ Schofield, Richard. "Amadeo, Bramante and Leonardo and the Cupola of Milan Cathedral" . Achademia Leonardi Vinci . Archived from the original on 7 April 2023 . Retrieved 9 August 2022 . ^ Barbieri, Ezio; Catanese, Filippo (January 2020). "Leonardo a (e i rapporti con) Pavia: una verifica sui documenti" . Annuar
, Filippo (January 2020). "Leonardo a (e i rapporti con) Pavia: una verifica sui documenti" . Annuario dell'Archivio di Stato di Milano . Archived from the original on 7 April 2023 . Retrieved 9 August 2022 . ^ Carlo Pedretti, Leonardo da Vinci: drawings of horses and other animals (Windsor Castle. Royal Library) 1984. ^ Wallace 1972 , p. 79. ^ Moffitt, John F. (1990). "Leonardo's "Sala delle Asse" and the Primordial Origins of Architecture" . Arte Lombarda (92/93 (1–2)). Vita e Pensiero – Pubbl
" and the Primordial Origins of Architecture" . Arte Lombarda (92/93 (1–2)). Vita e Pensiero – Pubblicazioni dell’Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore: 76–90. JSTOR 43132702 . Archived from the original on 16 August 2023 . Retrieved 17 August 2023 . ^ Rocky, Ruggiero (6 October 2021). "Episode 142 – Leonardo da Vinci's Sala delle Asse" . rockyruggiero.com . Making Art and History Come to Life, Rebuilding the Renaissance. Archived from the original on 3 June 2023 . Retrieved 11 October 2021 . ^ "
uilding the Renaissance. Archived from the original on 3 June 2023 . Retrieved 11 October 2021 . ^ "Segui il restauro" [Follow the restoration]. Castello Sforzesco – Sala delle Asse (in Italian). Archived from the original on 16 October 2018 . Retrieved 19 October 2018 . ^ Wallace 1972 , p. 65. ^ a b c d Ottino della Chiesa 1967 , p. 85. ^ Owen, Richard (12 January 2005). "Found: the studio where Leonardo met Mona Lisa" . The Times . London. Archived from the original on 3 July 2020 . Retrieved 
Leonardo met Mona Lisa" . The Times . London. Archived from the original on 3 July 2020 . Retrieved 5 January 2010 . ^ Wallace 1972 , p. 124. ^ "Mona Lisa – Heidelberg discovery confirms identity" . University of Heidelberg . Archived from the original on 5 November 2013 . Retrieved 4 July 2010 . ^ Delieuvin, Vincent (15 January 2008). "Télématin". Journal Télévisé . France 2 Télévision. ^ Coughlan, Robert (1966). The World of Michelangelo: 1475–1564 . et al. Time-Life Books. p. 90 . ^ Goldschei
n, Robert (1966). The World of Michelangelo: 1475–1564 . et al. Time-Life Books. p. 90 . ^ Goldscheider, Ludwig (1967). Michelangelo: paintings, sculptures, architecture . Phaidon Press. ISBN 978-0-7148-1314-1 . ^ Ottino della Chiesa 1967 , pp. 106–107. ^ a b c d e Wallace 1972 , p. 145. ^ "Achademia Leonardi Vinci". Journal of Leonardo Studies & Bibliography of Vinciana . VIII : 243–244. 1990. ^ a b c Ottino della Chiesa 1967 , p. 86. ^ a b Wallace 1972 , pp. 149–150. ^ Wallace 1972 , p. 151. ^
a b c Ottino della Chiesa 1967 , p. 86. ^ a b Wallace 1972 , pp. 149–150. ^ Wallace 1972 , p. 151. ^ a b c d e Wallace 1972 , p. 150. ^ Ohlig, Christoph P. J., ed. (2005). Integrated Land and Water Resources Management in History . Books on Demand. p. 33. ISBN 978-3-8334-2463-2 . ^ Gillette, Henry Sampson (2017). Leonardo da Vinci: Pathfinder of Science . Prabhat Prakashan. p. 84. Archived from the original on 23 March 2024 . Retrieved 10 September 2019 . ^ Laurenza, Domenico (2004). "Leonardo n
e original on 23 March 2024 . Retrieved 10 September 2019 . ^ Laurenza, Domenico (2004). "Leonardo nella Roma di Leone X". Lettura Vinciana (in Italian). XLIII . Giunti. ^ Sammer, Jan (2009). "L'Invitation du roi". In Pedretti, Carlo (ed.). Léonard de Vinci et la France (in French). CB Edizioni. pp. 29–33. ^ Wallace 1972 , pp. 163, 164. ^ "Reconstruction of Leonardo's walking lion" (in Italian). Archived from the original on 25 August 2009 . Retrieved 5 January 2010 . ^ Brown, Mark (1 May 2019).
rchived from the original on 25 August 2009 . Retrieved 5 January 2010 . ^ Brown, Mark (1 May 2019). "Newly identified sketch of Leonardo da Vinci to go on display in London" . The Guardian . Archived from the original on 4 December 2020 . Retrieved 2 May 2019 . ^ a b Strickland, Ashley (4 May 2019). "What caused Leonardo da Vinci's hand impairment?" . CNN . Archived from the original on 31 October 2020 . Retrieved 4 May 2019 . ^ a b McMahon, Barbara (1 May 2005). "Da Vinci 'paralysis left Mona 
r 2020 . Retrieved 4 May 2019 . ^ a b McMahon, Barbara (1 May 2005). "Da Vinci 'paralysis left Mona Lisa unfinished' " . The Guardian . Archived from the original on 8 February 2020 . Retrieved 2 May 2019 . ^ Wallace 1972 , p. 163. ^ a b Lorenzi, Rossella (10 May 2016). "Did a Stroke Kill Leonardo da Vinci?" . Seeker . Archived from the original on 22 December 2019 . Retrieved 5 May 2019 . ^ Saplakoglu, Yasemin (4 May 2019). "A Portrait of Leonardo da Vinci May Reveal Why He Never Finished the M
koglu, Yasemin (4 May 2019). "A Portrait of Leonardo da Vinci May Reveal Why He Never Finished the Mona Lisa" . Live Science . Archived from the original on 2 February 2020 . Retrieved 5 May 2019 . ^ a b Bodkin, Henry (4 May 2019). "Leonardo da Vinci never finished the Mona Lisa because he injured his arm while fainting, experts say" . The Telegraph . Archived from the original on 10 January 2022 . Retrieved 6 May 2019 . ^ a b Charlier, Philippe ; Deo, Saudamini. "A physical sign of stroke seque
. Retrieved 6 May 2019 . ^ a b Charlier, Philippe ; Deo, Saudamini. "A physical sign of stroke sequel on the skeleton of Leonardo da Vinci?" Archived 15 April 2017 at the Wayback Machine . Neurology . 4 April 2017; 88(14): 1381–1382 ^ Ian Chilvers (2003). The Concise Oxford Dictionary of Art and Artists . Oxford, England: Oxford University Press. p. 354. ISBN 978-0-19-953294-0 . ^ Antonina Vallentin, Leonardo da Vinci: The Tragic Pursuit of Perfection, (New York: The Viking Press, 1938), 533 ^ W
in, Leonardo da Vinci: The Tragic Pursuit of Perfection, (New York: The Viking Press, 1938), 533 ^ White, Leonardo: The First Scientist ^ Kemp 2011 , p. 26. ^ a b c Florentine editorial staff (2 May 2019). "Hair believed to have belonged to Leonardo on display in Vinci" . The Florentine . Archived from the original on 4 May 2019 . Retrieved 4 May 2019 . ^ Gasca, Nicolò & Lucertini 2004 , p. 13 . ^ Leonardo, Codex C. 15v . Institut of France. Trans. Richter. ^ Ottino della Chiesa 1967 , p. 84. ^ 
 Leonardo, Codex C. 15v . Institut of France. Trans. Richter. ^ Ottino della Chiesa 1967 , p. 84. ^ Rossiter, Nick (4 July 2003). "Could this be the secret of her smile?" . Daily Telegraph . London. Archived from the original on 25 September 2003 . Retrieved 3 October 2007 . ^ a b Pedretti, Carlo, ed. (2009). Leonardo da Vinci: l'Angelo incarnato & Salai = the Angel in the flesh & Salai . Foligno (Perugia): Cartei & Bianchi. p. 201. ISBN 978-88-95686-11-0 . OCLC 500794484 . ^ MacCurdy, Edward, T
(Perugia): Cartei & Bianchi. p. 201. ISBN 978-88-95686-11-0 . OCLC 500794484 . ^ MacCurdy, Edward, The Mind of Leonardo da Vinci (1928) in Leonardo da Vinci's Ethical Vegetarianism Archived 27 February 2009 at the Wayback Machine ^ Bambach 2003 . ^ Cartwright Ady, Julia. Beatrice d'Este, Duchess of Milan, 1475–1497. Publisher: J.M. Dent, 1899; Cartwright Ady, Julia. Isabella D'Este, Marchioness of Mantua, 1474–1539. Publisher; J.M. Dent, 1903. ^ Sigmund Freud, Eine Kindheitserinnerung des Leonar
 Mantua, 1474–1539. Publisher; J.M. Dent, 1903. ^ Sigmund Freud, Eine Kindheitserinnerung des Leonardo da Vinci , (1910) ^ Isaacson 2017 , pp. 129–138. ^ a b Isaacson 2017 . ^ "Leonardo, ladies' man: why can't we accept that Da Vinci was gay?" . The Guardian . 26 March 2021. Archived from the original on 11 May 2022 . Retrieved 27 March 2021 . ^ Michael Rocke, Forbidden Friendships epigraph, p. 148 & N120 p. 298 ^ Arasse 1998 , pp. 11–15. ^ Ottino della Chiesa 1967 , pp. 88, 90. ^ Marani 2003 , 
8 & N120 p. 298 ^ Arasse 1998 , pp. 11–15. ^ Ottino della Chiesa 1967 , pp. 88, 90. ^ Marani 2003 , p. 338. ^ a b Wasserman 1975 , pp. 104–106. ^ Wasserman 1975 , p. 108. ^ "The Mysterious Virgin" . National Gallery, London . Archived from the original on 15 October 2007 . Retrieved 27 September 2007 . ^ a b "Da Vinci's Lady with an Ermine among Poland's "Treasures" – Event – Culture.pl" . Archived from the original on 1 December 2017 . Retrieved 18 November 2017 . ^ Kemp, M. The Lady with an Er
d from the original on 1 December 2017 . Retrieved 18 November 2017 . ^ Kemp, M. The Lady with an Ermine in the exhibition Circa 1492: Art in the Age of Exploration . Washington-New Haven-London. p. 271. ^ Wasserman 1975 , p. 124. ^ Ottino della Chiesa 1967 , p. 97. ^ Ottino della Chiesa 1967 , p. 98. ^ Seracini, Maurizio (2012). "The Secret Lives of Paintings" (lecture) . Archived from the original on 18 October 2019 . Retrieved 14 March 2016 . ^ Wasserman 1975 , p. 144. ^ Ottino della Chiesa 1
al on 18 October 2019 . Retrieved 14 March 2016 . ^ Wasserman 1975 , p. 144. ^ Ottino della Chiesa 1967 , p. 103. ^ Wasserman 1975 , p. 150. ^ Ottino della Chiesa 1967 , p. 109. ^ a b c d e f g h Popham, A. E. (1946). The Drawings of Leonardo da Vinci . ^ Ottino della Chiesa 1967 , p. 102. ^ Hartt 1970 , pp. 391–392. ^ a b c Wallace 1972 , p. 169. ^ a b c Keele Kenneth D (1964). "Leonardo da Vinci's Influence on Renaissance Anatomy" . Med Hist . 8 (4): 360–370. doi : 10.1017/s0025727300029835 . 
's Influence on Renaissance Anatomy" . Med Hist . 8 (4): 360–370. doi : 10.1017/s0025727300029835 . PMC 1033412 . PMID 14230140 . ^ Bean, Jacob; Stampfle, Felice (1965). Drawings from New York Collections I: The Italian Renaissance . Greenwich, CT: Metropolitan Museum of Art. pp. 81–82. ^ Major, Richard Henry (1866). Archaeologia: Or Miscellaneous Tracts Relating to Antiquity, Volume 40, Part 1 . London: The Society. pp. 15–16. Archived from the original on 23 March 2024 . Retrieved 1 October 20
London: The Society. pp. 15–16. Archived from the original on 23 March 2024 . Retrieved 1 October 2019 . ^ Calder, Ritchie (1970). Leonardo & the Age of the Eye . New York: Simon and Schuster. p. 275. ISBN 978-0-671-20713-7 . ^ "Sketches by Leonardo" . Turning the Pages . British Library . Archived from the original on 24 June 2010 . Retrieved 27 September 2007 . ^ a b Da Vinci, Leonardo (1960). Taylor, Pamela; Taylor, Francis Henry (eds.). The Notebooks of Leonardo da Vinci . New York: New Amer
aylor, Pamela; Taylor, Francis Henry (eds.). The Notebooks of Leonardo da Vinci . New York: New American Library . p. x. ISBN 978-0-486-22572-2 . ^ Livio, Mario (2003) [2002]. The Golden Ratio: The Story of Phi, the World's Most Astonishing Number (First trade paperback ed.). New York City: Broadway Books . p. 136. ISBN 0-7679-0816-3 . Archived from the original on 13 March 2023 . Retrieved 22 December 2018 . ^ Wallace 1972 , p. 31. ^ Ciaccia, Chris (15 April 2019). "Da Vinci was ambidextrous, n
ember 2018 . ^ Wallace 1972 , p. 31. ^ Ciaccia, Chris (15 April 2019). "Da Vinci was ambidextrous, new handwriting analysis shows" . Fox News . Archived from the original on 13 February 2020 . Retrieved 15 April 2019 . ^ Windsor Castle, Royal Library, sheets RL 19073v–74v and RL 19102. ^ Cook, Theodore Andrea (1914). The Curves of Life . London: Constable and Company Ltd. p. 390 . ^ Baucon, A. 2010. Da Vinci's Paleodictyon : the fractal beauty of traces. Acta Geologica Polonica, 60(1). Accessibl
0. Da Vinci's Paleodictyon : the fractal beauty of traces. Acta Geologica Polonica, 60(1). Accessible from the author's homepage Archived 11 May 2019 at the Wayback Machine ^ O'Malley; Saunders (1982). Leonardo on the Human Body . New York: Dover Publications. ^ Ottino della Chiesa 1967 , p. 117. ^ Capra 2007 , pp. xvii–xx. ^ "Leonardo da Vinci" . Britannica . Archived from the original on 9 August 2022 . Retrieved 9 August 2022 . ^ a b Alastair Sooke , Daily Telegraph , 28 July 2013, "Leonardo 
t 2022 . Retrieved 9 August 2022 . ^ a b Alastair Sooke , Daily Telegraph , 28 July 2013, "Leonardo da Vinci: Anatomy of an artist" Archived 2 December 2019 at the Wayback Machine , accessed 29 July 2013. ^ Mason, Stephen F. (1962). A History of the Sciences . New York: Collier Books. p. 550 . ^ Jones, Roger (2012). "Leonardo da Vinci: anatomist" . British Journal of General Practice . 62 (599): 319. doi : 10.3399/bjgp12X649241 . ISSN 0960-1643 . PMC 3361109 . PMID 22687222 . ^ Guarnieri, M. (20
19. doi : 10.3399/bjgp12X649241 . ISSN 0960-1643 . PMC 3361109 . PMID 22687222 . ^ Guarnieri, M. (2019). "Reconsidering Leonardo". IEEE Industrial Electronics Magazine . 13 (3): 35–38. doi : 10.1109/MIE.2019.2929366 . hdl : 11577/3310853 . S2CID 202729396 . ^ Masters, Roger (1996). Machiavelli, Leonardo and the Science of Power . ^ Masters, Roger (1998). Fortune is a River: Leonardo Da Vinci and Niccolò Machiavelli's Magnificent Dream to Change the Course of Florentine History . Simon & Schuster
iccolò Machiavelli's Magnificent Dream to Change the Course of Florentine History . Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0-452-28090-8 . ^ Wallace 1972 , p. 164. ^ "Leonardo's Dream Machines (TV Movie 2003)" . IMDb . Archived from the original on 8 February 2017 . Retrieved 30 June 2018 . ^ British Library online gallery Archived 21 November 2019 at the Wayback Machine (retrieved 10 October 2013) ^ Marc van den Broek (2019). Leonardo da Vinci Spirits of Invention. A Search for Traces . Hamburg: A.TE.M. IS
 den Broek (2019). Leonardo da Vinci Spirits of Invention. A Search for Traces . Hamburg: A.TE.M. ISBN 978-3-00-063700-1 . ^ Hutchings, Ian M. (15 August 2016). "Leonardo da Vinci׳s studies of friction" . Wear . 360–361: 51–66. doi : 10.1016/j.wear.2016.04.019 . ISSN 0043-1648 . Archived from the original on 12 February 2017 . Retrieved 22 January 2021 . ^ Isaacson 2017 , pp. 194–197. ^ Dowson, Duncan (1 October 1977). "Men of Tribology: Leonardo da Vinci (1452–1519)" . Journal of Lubrication Te
ncan (1 October 1977). "Men of Tribology: Leonardo da Vinci (1452–1519)" . Journal of Lubrication Technology . 99 (4): 382–386. doi : 10.1115/1.3453230 . ISSN 0022-2305 . Archived from the original on 23 February 2023 . Retrieved 22 January 2021 . ^ Polidoro, Massimo (2019). "The Mind of Leonardo da Vinci, Part 2". Skeptical Inquirer . 43 (3): 23–24. ^ a b c Gardner, Helen (1970). Art through the Ages . pp. 450–56. ^ See the quotations from the following authors, in section "Fame and reputation"
Ages . pp. 450–56. ^ See the quotations from the following authors, in section "Fame and reputation": Vasari, Boltraffio, Castiglione, "Anonimo" Gaddiano, Berensen, Taine, Fuseli, Rio, Bortolon. ^ Rosci 1977 , p. 8. ^ Castiglione, Baldassare (1528). "Il Cortegiano" (in Italian). ^ "Anonimo Gaddiani", elaborating on Libro di Antonio Billi , 1537–1542 ^ Fuseli, Henry (1801). Lectures . Vol II. ^ Rio, A.E. (1861). "L'art chrétien" (in French) . Retrieved 19 May 2021 . ^ Taine, Hippolyte (1866). "Vo
, A.E. (1861). "L'art chrétien" (in French) . Retrieved 19 May 2021 . ^ Taine, Hippolyte (1866). "Voyage en Italie" (in Italian). Paris, Hachette et cie . Retrieved 19 May 2021 . ^ Berenson, Bernard (1896). The Italian Painters of the Renaissance . ^ Henneberger, Melinda. "ArtNews article about current studies into Leonardo's life and works" . Art News Online. Archived from the original on 5 May 2006 . Retrieved 10 January 2010 . ^ Marmor, Max. "The Elmer Belt Library of Vinciana." The Book Coll
006 . Retrieved 10 January 2010 . ^ Marmor, Max. "The Elmer Belt Library of Vinciana." The Book Collector 38, no. 3 (Autumn 1989): 1–23. ^ Italie, Hillel (7 January 2018). "NonFiction: Biography honors 'fun, joyous' sides of genius da Vinci". Richmond Times-Dispatch . Associated Press. p. G6. ^ Crow, Kelly (16 November 2017). "Leonardo da Vinci Painting 'Salvator Mundi' Sells for $450.3 Million" . The Wall Street Journal . ISSN 0099-9660 . Archived from the original on 29 June 2020 . Retrieved 1
 The Wall Street Journal . ISSN 0099-9660 . Archived from the original on 29 June 2020 . Retrieved 16 November 2017 . ^ a b Leonardo da Vinci painting 'Salvator Mundi' sold for record $450.3 million , Fox News Archived 16 November 2017 at the Wayback Machine , 16 November 2017 ^ "Leonardo da Vinci's Unexamined Life as a Painter" . The Atlantic . 1 December 2019. Archived from the original on 29 October 2020 . Retrieved 1 December 2019 . ^ "Louvre exhibit has most da Vinci paintings ever assemble
tober 2020 . Retrieved 1 December 2019 . ^ "Louvre exhibit has most da Vinci paintings ever assembled" . Aleteia. 1 December 2019. Archived from the original on 29 October 2020 . Retrieved 1 December 2019 . ^ Turner 1993 , p. 3. ^ Vitruvian Man is referred to as "iconic" at the following websites and many others: Vitruvian Man Archived 2 October 2020 at the Wayback Machine , Fine Art Classics Archived 9 September 2017 at the Wayback Machine , Key Images in the History of Science ; Curiosity and 
ived 9 September 2017 at the Wayback Machine , Key Images in the History of Science ; Curiosity and difference at the Wayback Machine (archived 30 January 2009); "The Guardian: The Real da Vinci Code" Archived 3 August 2020 at the Wayback Machine ^ Turner, Ben (6 July 2021). "Scientists may have cracked the mystery of da Vinci's DNA" . Live Science . Archived from the original on 8 July 2021 . Retrieved 9 July 2021 . ^ a b c d e Nicholl 2005 , p. 502 . ^ a b Isaacson 2017 , p. 515. ^ a b c d e M
rieved 9 July 2021 . ^ a b c d e Nicholl 2005 , p. 502 . ^ a b Isaacson 2017 , p. 515. ^ a b c d e Montard, Nicolas (30 April 2019). "Léonard de Vinci est-il vraiment enterré au château d'Amboise?" [Is Leonardo da Vinci really buried at the Château d'Amboise?]. Ouest-France (in French). Archived from the original on 30 April 2019 . Retrieved 4 May 2019 . ^ Heaton 1874 , p. 204 , "The skeleton, which measured five feet eight inches, accords with the height of Leonardo da Vinci. The skull might ha
ch measured five feet eight inches, accords with the height of Leonardo da Vinci. The skull might have served for the model of the portrait Leonardo drew of himself in red chalk a few years before his death.". ^ a b c Knapton, Sarah (5 May 2016). "Leonardo da Vinci paintings analysed for DNA to solve grave mystery" . The Daily Telegraph . Archived from the original on 10 January 2022 . Retrieved 21 August 2017 . ^ Newman, Lily Hay (6 May 2016). "Researchers Are Planning to Sequence Leonardo da V
1 August 2017 . ^ Newman, Lily Hay (6 May 2016). "Researchers Are Planning to Sequence Leonardo da Vinci's 500-Year-Old Genome" . Slate Magazine . Archived from the original on 7 March 2020 . Retrieved 4 May 2019 . ^ Messia, Hada; Robinson, Matthew (30 April 2019). "Leonardo da Vinci's 'hair' to undergo DNA testing" . CNN . Archived from the original on 28 November 2019 . Retrieved 3 May 2019 . Works cited Early Anonimo Gaddiano (c. 1530). "Leonardo da Vinci". Codice Magliabechiano . in Lives of
rks cited Early Anonimo Gaddiano (c. 1530). "Leonardo da Vinci". Codice Magliabechiano . in Lives of Leonardo da Vinci (Lives of the Artists) . Los Angeles: J. Paul Getty Museum . 2019. pp. 103–114. ISBN 978-1-60606-621-8 . Giovio, Paolo (c. 1527). "The Life of Leonardo da Vinci". Elogia virorum illustrium . in Lives of Leonardo da Vinci (Lives of the Artists) . Los Angeles: J. Paul Getty Museum . 2019. pp. 103–114. ISBN 978-1-60606-621-8 . Vasari, Giorgio (1965) [1568]. "The Life of Leonardo da
 2019. pp. 103–114. ISBN 978-1-60606-621-8 . Vasari, Giorgio (1965) [1568]. "The Life of Leonardo da Vinci". Lives of the Artists . Translated by George Bull. Penguin Classics. ISBN 978-0-14-044164-2 . —— (1991) [1568]. The Lives of the Artists . Oxford World's Classics. Translated by Bondanella, Peter; Bondanella, Julia Conway. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-283410-X . Modern Books Arasse, Daniel [in French] (1998). Leonardo da Vinci . Old Saybrook : Konecky & Konecky. ISBN 978-1-56852-198-
niel [in French] (1998). Leonardo da Vinci . Old Saybrook : Konecky & Konecky. ISBN 978-1-56852-198-5 . Bambach, Carmen C. , ed. (2003). Leonardo da Vinci, Master Draftsman . New York: Metropolitan Museum of Art . ISBN 978-0-300-09878-5 . Archived from the original on 23 March 2024 . Retrieved 14 November 2020 . Bambach, Carmen C. (2019). Leonardo da Vinci Rediscovered . Vol. 1, The Making of an Artist: 1452–1500. New Haven: Yale University Press . ISBN 978-0-300-19195-0 . Bortolon, Liana (1967)
rtist: 1452–1500. New Haven: Yale University Press . ISBN 978-0-300-19195-0 . Bortolon, Liana (1967). The Life and Times of Leonardo . London: Paul Hamlyn. Brown, David Alan (1998). Leonardo Da Vinci: Origins of a Genius . New Haven: Yale University Press . ISBN 978-0-300-07246-4 . Archived from the original on 23 March 2024 . Retrieved 23 July 2020 . Capra, Fritjof (2007). The Science of Leonardo . US: Doubleday. ISBN 978-0-385-51390-6 . Clark, Kenneth (1961). Leonardo da Vinci . City of Westmi
 . US: Doubleday. ISBN 978-0-385-51390-6 . Clark, Kenneth (1961). Leonardo da Vinci . City of Westminster: Penguin Books . OCLC 187223 . Gasca, Ana Millàn; Nicolò, Fernando; Lucertini, Mario (2004). Technological Concepts and Mathematical Models in the Evolution of Modern Engineering Systems . Birkhauser. ISBN 978-3-7643-6940-8 . Hartt, Frederich (1970). A History of Italian Renaissance Art . Thames and Hudson. ISBN 978-0-500-23136-4 . Heaton, Mary Margaret (1874). Leonardo Da Vinci and His Work
es and Hudson. ISBN 978-0-500-23136-4 . Heaton, Mary Margaret (1874). Leonardo Da Vinci and His Works: Consisting of a Life of Leonardo Da Vinci . New York: Macmillan Publishers . OCLC 1706262 . Archived from the original on 23 March 2024 . Retrieved 26 September 2020 . Isaacson, Walter (2017). Leonardo da Vinci . New York: Simon & Schuster . ISBN 978-1-5011-3915-4 . Archived from the original on 23 March 2024 . Retrieved 23 July 2020 . Kemp, Martin (2006) [1981]. Leonardo Da Vinci: The Marvello
23 March 2024 . Retrieved 23 July 2020 . Kemp, Martin (2006) [1981]. Leonardo Da Vinci: The Marvellous Works of Nature and Man . Oxford: Oxford University Press . ISBN 978-0-19-920778-7 . Archived from the original on 23 March 2024 . Retrieved 23 July 2020 . Kemp, Martin (2011) [2004]. Leonardo (Revised ed.). Oxford, England: Oxford University Press . ISBN 978-0-19-280644-4 . Kemp, Martin; Pallanti, Giuseppe (2017). Mona Lisa: The People and the Painting . Oxford: Oxford University Press . ISBN 
i, Giuseppe (2017). Mona Lisa: The People and the Painting . Oxford: Oxford University Press . ISBN 978-0-19-874990-5 . Kemp, Martin (2019). Leonardo da Vinci: The 100 Milestones . New York: Sterling . ISBN 978-1-4549-3042-6 . Magnano, Milena (2007). Leonardo . I geni dell'arte. Milano: Mondadori Arte. ISBN 978-88-370-6432-7 . Marani, Pietro C. (2003) [2000]. Leonardo da Vinci: The Complete Paintings . New York: Harry N. Abrams . ISBN 978-0-8109-3581-5 . Martindale, Andrew (1972). The Rise of th
ngs . New York: Harry N. Abrams . ISBN 978-0-8109-3581-5 . Martindale, Andrew (1972). The Rise of the Artist . Thames and Hudson. ISBN 978-0-500-56006-8 . Nicholl, Charles (2005). Leonardo da Vinci: The Flights of the Mind . London: Penguin Books . ISBN 978-0-14-029681-5 . O'Malley, Charles D. ; Saunders, J.B. de C.M. (1952). Leonardo on the Human Body: The Anatomical, Physiological, and Embryological Drawings of Leonardo da Vinci. With Translations, Emendations and a Biographical Introduction .
ical Drawings of Leonardo da Vinci. With Translations, Emendations and a Biographical Introduction . New York: Henry Schuman. Ottino della Chiesa, Angela (1967). The Complete Paintings of Leonardo da Vinci . Classics of the World's Great Art. Translated by Jay, Madeline. New York: Harry N. Abrams . Pedretti, Carlo (1982). Leonardo, a study in chronology and style . Cambridge: Johnson Reprint Corp. ISBN 978-0-384-45281-7 . Pedretti, Carlo (2006). Leonardo da Vinci . Surrey: Taj Books Internationa
 ISBN 978-0-384-45281-7 . Pedretti, Carlo (2006). Leonardo da Vinci . Surrey: Taj Books International. ISBN 978-1-84406-036-8 . Popham, A.E. (1946). The Drawings of Leonardo da Vinci . Jonathan Cape. ISBN 978-0-224-60462-8 . Richter, Jean Paul (1970). The Notebooks of Leonardo da Vinci . Dover. ISBN 978-0-486-22572-2 . volume 2: ISBN 0-486-22573-9 . A reprint of the original 1883 edition Archived 28 July 2020 at the Wayback Machine Rosci, Marco (1977). Leonardo . Bay Books Pty Ltd. ISBN 978-0-85
28 July 2020 at the Wayback Machine Rosci, Marco (1977). Leonardo . Bay Books Pty Ltd. ISBN 978-0-85835-176-9 . Syson, Luke; Keith, Larry; Galansino, Arturo; Mazzotta, Antoni; Nethersole, Scott; Rumberg, Per (2011). Leonardo da Vinci: Painter at the Court of Milan . London: National Gallery . ISBN 978-1-85709-491-6 . Turner, A. Richard (1993). Inventing Leonardo . New York: Alfred A. Knopf . ISBN 978-0-520-08938-9 . Archived from the original on 23 March 2024 . Retrieved 23 July 2020 . Vezzosi, 
978-0-520-08938-9 . Archived from the original on 23 March 2024 . Retrieved 23 July 2020 . Vezzosi, Alessandro (1997). Leonardo da Vinci: Renaissance Man . ' New Horizons ' series. Translated by Bonfante-Warren, Alexandra (English translation ed.). London: Thames & Hudson . ISBN 978-0-500-30081-7 . Wallace, Robert (1972) [1966]. The World of Leonardo: 1452–1519 . New York: Time-Life Books. Wasserman, Jack (1975). Leonardo da Vinci . New York: Harry N. Abrams . ISBN 978-0-8109-0262-6 . Williamson
an, Jack (1975). Leonardo da Vinci . New York: Harry N. Abrams . ISBN 978-0-8109-0262-6 . Williamson, Hugh Ross (1974). Lorenzo the Magnificent . Michael Joseph. ISBN 978-0-7181-1204-2 . Zöllner, Frank (2015). Leonardo (2nd ed.). Cologne: Taschen . ISBN 978-3-8365-0215-3 . Zöllner, Frank (2019) [2003]. Leonardo da Vinci: The Complete Paintings and Drawings (Anniversary ed.). Cologne: Taschen . ISBN 978-3-8365-7625-3 . Journals and encyclopedia articles Brown, David Alan (1983). "Leonardo and the
N 978-3-8365-7625-3 . Journals and encyclopedia articles Brown, David Alan (1983). "Leonardo and the Idealized Portrait in Milan". Arte Lombarda . 64 (4): 102–116. JSTOR 43105426 . (subscription required) Colvin, Sidney (1911). "Leonardo da Vinci" . Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 16 (11th ed.). pp. 444–454. Cremante, Simona (2005). Leonardo da Vinci: Artist, Scientist, Inventor . Giunti. ISBN 978-88-09-03891-2 . Giacomelli, Raffaele (1936). Gli scritti di Leonardo da Vinci sul volo . Roma: G. Ba
88-09-03891-2 . Giacomelli, Raffaele (1936). Gli scritti di Leonardo da Vinci sul volo . Roma: G. Bardi. Heydenreich, Ludwig Heinrich (28 April 2020). "Leonardo da Vinci | Biography, Art & Facts | Britannica" . Encyclopædia Britannica . Chicago: Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc. Archived from the original on 25 February 2012 . Retrieved 26 September 2020 . Kemp, Martin (2003). "Leonardo da Vinci" . Grove Art Online . Oxford: Oxford University Press . doi : 10.1093/gao/9781884446054.article.T050401 .
ove Art Online . Oxford: Oxford University Press . doi : 10.1093/gao/9781884446054.article.T050401 . ISBN 978-1-884446-05-4 . Archived from the original on 11 March 2021 . Retrieved 23 July 2020 . (subscription or UK public library membership required) Lupia, John N. (Summer 1994). "The Secret Revealed: How to Look at Italian Renaissance Painting". Medieval and Renaissance Times . 1 (2): 6–17. ISSN 1075-2110 . Further reading See Kemp (2003) and Bambach (2019 , pp. 442–579) for extensive bibliog
N 1075-2110 . Further reading See Kemp (2003) and Bambach (2019 , pp. 442–579) for extensive bibliographies Library resources about Leonardo da Vinci Online books Resources in your library Resources in other libraries By Leonardo da Vinci Online books Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Vanna, Arrighi; Bellinazzi, Anna; Villata, Edoardo, eds. (2005). Leonardo da Vinci: la vera immagine: documenti e testimonianze sulla vita e sull'opera [ Leonardo da Vinci: the true image: docu
mmagine: documenti e testimonianze sulla vita e sull'opera [ Leonardo da Vinci: the true image: documents and testimonies on life and work ] (in Italian). Florence: Giunti Editore . ISBN 978-88-09-04519-4 . Vecce, Carlo (2006). Leonardo (in Italian). Foreword by Carlo Pedretti . Rome: Salerno. ISBN 978-88-8402-548-7 . Winternitz, Emanuel (1982). Leonardo da Vinci As a Musician . New Haven: Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-02631-3 . Leonardo da Vinci: anatomical drawings from the Royal Libra
iversity Press. ISBN 978-0-300-02631-3 . Leonardo da Vinci: anatomical drawings from the Royal Library, Windsor Castle . New York: The Metropolitan Museum of Art . 1983. ISBN 978-0-87099-362-6 . Archived from the original on 15 July 2017 . Retrieved 31 January 2013 . External links General Universal Leonardo , a database of Leonardo's life and works maintained by Martin Kemp and Marina Wallace Leonardo da Vinci on the National Gallery website Works Biblioteca Leonardiana , online bibliography (i
nardo da Vinci on the National Gallery website Works Biblioteca Leonardiana , online bibliography (in Italian) e-Leo: Archivio digitale di storia della tecnica e della scienza , archive of drawings, notes and manuscripts Works by Leonardo da Vinci at Project Gutenberg Works by Leonardo da Vinci at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Complete text and images of Richter's translation of the Notebooks The Notebooks of Leonardo da Vinci v t e Leonardo da Vinci List of works Science and inventions Pe
s The Notebooks of Leonardo da Vinci v t e Leonardo da Vinci List of works Science and inventions Personal life Major works The Annunciation The Baptism of Christ ✻ The Madonna of the Carnation Ginevra de' Benci Benois Madonna The Adoration of the Magi Saint Jerome in the Wilderness Madonna Litta ✻ Virgin of the Rocks Portrait of a Musician ✻✻ Lady with an Ermine La Belle Ferronnière The Last Supper Sala delle Asse Portrait of Isabella d'Este The Virgin and Child with Saint Anne and Saint John t
er Sala delle Asse Portrait of Isabella d'Este The Virgin and Child with Saint Anne and Saint John the Baptist Buccleuch Madonna ✻ Salvator Mundi ✻✻ Lansdowne Madonna ✻ The Virgin and Child with Saint Anne Mona Lisa La Scapigliata Saint John the Baptist Lost works Medusa The Virgin and Child with Saint Anne (cartoon) Madonna and Child with the Infant Saint John the Baptist The Holy Infants Embracing The Battle of Anghiari Leda and the Swan Sculptures Budapest Horse Horse and Rider Sforza Horse (
ng The Battle of Anghiari Leda and the Swan Sculptures Budapest Horse Horse and Rider Sforza Horse (unexecuted) Works on paper Study for the Madonna of the Cat Head of a Bear The Martyrdom of Saint Sebastian Vitruvian Man Studies of the Fetus in the Womb Portrait of a Man in Red Chalk Studies for the Virgin of the Rocks Designs for an Adoration of the Christ Child Head of the Angel Head of the Infant Saint John the Baptist Studies for the Last Supper Head of Christ Studies for the Louvre Saint A
ant Saint John the Baptist Studies for the Last Supper Head of Christ Studies for the Louvre Saint Anne Christ Child Drapery of the Virgin's Right Arm Head of Saint Anne Head of the Virgin Manuscripts Codex Arundel Codex Atlanticus Codex on the Flight of Birds Codex Leicester Codex Madrid Codex Trivulzianus A Treatise on Painting Other projects Architonnerre Divina proportione (illustrations) Great Kite Harpsichord-viola Aerial screw Crossbow Fighting vehicle Robot Self-propelled cart Octant pro
t Kite Harpsichord-viola Aerial screw Crossbow Fighting vehicle Robot Self-propelled cart Octant projection Rapid fire crossbow Sonar Viola organista World Map Leonardeschi Giovanni Antonio Boltraffio Cesare da Sesto Bernardino de' Conti Giampietrino Giovanni Agostino da Lodi Bernardino Luini Cesare Magni Marco d'Oggiono Francesco Melzi Giovanni Ambrogio de Predis Salaì Andrea Solari Museums Museo leonardiano di Vinci Museo Ideale Leonardo da Vinci Leonardo3 Museum Museo Nazionale Scienza e Tecn
 leonardiano di Vinci Museo Ideale Leonardo da Vinci Leonardo3 Museum Museo Nazionale Scienza e Tecnologia Leonardo da Vinci (Milan) Related Cultural references Namesakes Portraits of Leonardo Conservation-restoration of The Last Supper Mona Lisa replicas and reinterpretations High Renaissance Mathematics and art The Lost Leonardo Leda and the Swan (Galleria Borghese) ✻ Collaboration ✻✻ Possible collaboration Category v t e House of Medici People Lords of Florence Cosimo "The Elder" Piero "The G
ollaboration Category v t e House of Medici People Lords of Florence Cosimo "The Elder" Piero "The Gouty" Lorenzo "The Magnificent" Piero "The Brief" Giovanni, Pope Leo X Giuliano Lorenzo II Giulio (Clement VII) Ippolito Alessandro "The Moor" Dukes of Florence Alessandro "The Moor" Cosimo I Grand Dukes of Tuscany Cosimo I Francesco I Ferdinando I Cosimo II Ferdinando II Cosimo III Gian Gastone Queens of France Caterina Maria Popes Leo X Clement VII Leo XI Cardinals male line : Giovanni (Leo X) G
ens of France Caterina Maria Popes Leo X Clement VII Leo XI Cardinals male line : Giovanni (Leo X) Giulio (Clement VII) Ippolito Alessandro (Leo XI) Giovanni Ferdinando I Carlo Giovan Carlo Leopoldo Francesco Maria Francesco female line : Luigi de' Rossi Giovanni Salviati Innocenzo Cybo Bernardo Salviati Niccolò Ridolfi Lorenzo Strozzi Ferrante Gonzaga Vincenzo II Gonzaga Bishops and archbishops Filippo Bernardo Antonio Giuliano Zanobi Condottieri Giovanni delle Bande Nere Don Giovanni Mattias G
ilippo Bernardo Antonio Giuliano Zanobi Condottieri Giovanni delle Bande Nere Don Giovanni Mattias Genealogy Genealogical tables of the House of Medici Festina Lente Buildings Villas Cafaggiolo Trebbio Careggi Fiesole La Quiete Collesalvetti Poggio a Caiano Castello Mezzomonte Agnano Spedaletto La Petraia Camugliano Stabbia La Topaia Cerreto Guidi Marignolle Arena Metato Poggio Imperiale Lapeggi L'Ambrogiana La Màgia Liliano Coltano Montevettolini Artimino Buti Seravezza Madama Palaces Casino Me
'Ambrogiana La Màgia Liliano Coltano Montevettolini Artimino Buti Seravezza Madama Palaces Casino Mediceo di San Marco Palazzo Medici Riccardi Palazzo Madama Palazzo Pitti Villa Medici Palazzo Medici Tornaquinci Livorno Palazzo delle Vedove Pisa Materdei Palazzo Medici di Ottaviano Fountains and gardens Medici fountain Villa di Pratolino Fortresses Arezzo Grosseto Piombino Pistoia San Piero a Sieve Siena Volterra Chapels Magi Chapel Medici Chapels , San Lorenzo New Sacristy Cappella dei Principi
e Siena Volterra Chapels Magi Chapel Medici Chapels , San Lorenzo New Sacristy Cappella dei Principi Old Sacristy Patronage Painters, sculptors and architects Bartolomeo Ammannati Sandro Botticelli Filippo Brunelleschi Michelangelo Michelangelo and the Medici Bernardo Buontalenti Leonardo da Vinci Donatello Michelozzo Antonio del Pollaiuolo Jacopo della Quercia Giorgio Vasari Poets and other literary figures Agnolo Poliziano Niccolò Machiavelli Humanists and philosophers Pico della Mirandola Mar
ary figures Agnolo Poliziano Niccolò Machiavelli Humanists and philosophers Pico della Mirandola Marsilio Ficino Scientists Galileo Galilei Musicians Emilio de' Cavalieri Jacopo Peri Heraldry Medici coat of arms Crown of the Grand Duke of Tuscany Order of Saint Stephen Institutions Medici Bank Art Medici lions Medici porcelain Medici Vase Venus de' Medici Arazzeria Medicea Related Medici giraffe Galilean moons Stories set to music: "opera" Albizzi Pazzi conspiracy Savonarola TV series episodes v
alilean moons Stories set to music: "opera" Albizzi Pazzi conspiracy Savonarola TV series episodes v t e Mathematics and art Concepts Algorithm Catenary Fractal Golden ratio Hyperboloid structure Minimal surface Paraboloid Perspective Camera lucida Camera obscura Plastic ratio Projective geometry Proportion Architecture Human Symmetry Tessellation Wallpaper group Forms Algorithmic art Anamorphic art Architecture Geodesic dome Pyramid Vastu shastra Computer art Fiber arts 4D art Fractal art Islam
rt Architecture Geodesic dome Pyramid Vastu shastra Computer art Fiber arts 4D art Fractal art Islamic geometric patterns Girih Jali Muqarnas Zellij Knotting Celtic knot Croatian interlace Interlace Music Origami Mathematics Sculpture String art Tiling Artworks List of works designed with the golden ratio Continuum Mathemalchemy Mathematica: A World of Numbers... and Beyond Octacube Pi Pi in the Sky Buildings Cathedral of Saint Mary of the Assumption Hagia Sophia Pantheon Parthenon Pyramid of Kh
ky Buildings Cathedral of Saint Mary of the Assumption Hagia Sophia Pantheon Parthenon Pyramid of Khufu Sagrada Família Sydney Opera House Taj Mahal Artists Renaissance Paolo Uccello Piero della Francesca Leonardo da Vinci Vitruvian Man Albrecht Dürer Parmigianino Self-portrait in a Convex Mirror 19th–20th Century William Blake The Ancient of Days Newton Jean Metzinger Danseuse au café L'Oiseau bleu Giorgio de Chirico Man Ray M. C. Escher Circle Limit III Print Gallery Relativity Reptiles Waterf
eu Giorgio de Chirico Man Ray M. C. Escher Circle Limit III Print Gallery Relativity Reptiles Waterfall René Magritte La condition humaine Salvador Dalí Crucifixion The Swallow's Tail Crockett Johnson Contemporary Max Bill Martin and Erik Demaine Scott Draves Jan Dibbets John Ernest Helaman Ferguson Peter Forakis Susan Goldstine Bathsheba Grossman George W. Hart Desmond Paul Henry Anthony Hill Charles Jencks Garden of Cosmic Speculation Andy Lomas Robert Longhurst Jeanette McLeod Hamid Naderi Ye
rles Jencks Garden of Cosmic Speculation Andy Lomas Robert Longhurst Jeanette McLeod Hamid Naderi Yeganeh István Orosz Hinke Osinga Antoine Pevsner Tony Robbin Alba Rojo Cama Reza Sarhangi Oliver Sin Hiroshi Sugimoto Daina Taimiņa Roman Verostko Margaret Wertheim Theorists Ancient Polykleitos Canon Vitruvius De architectura Renaissance Filippo Brunelleschi Leon Battista Alberti De pictura De re aedificatoria Piero della Francesca De prospectiva pingendi Luca Pacioli De divina proportione Leonard
dificatoria Piero della Francesca De prospectiva pingendi Luca Pacioli De divina proportione Leonardo da Vinci A Treatise on Painting Albrecht Dürer Vier Bücher von Menschlicher Proportion Sebastiano Serlio Regole generali d'architettura Andrea Palladio I quattro libri dell'architettura Romantic Samuel Colman Nature's Harmonic Unity Frederik Macody Lund Ad Quadratum Jay Hambidge The Greek Vase Modern Owen Jones The Grammar of Ornament Ernest Hanbury Hankin The Drawing of Geometric Patterns in Sa
ern Owen Jones The Grammar of Ornament Ernest Hanbury Hankin The Drawing of Geometric Patterns in Saracenic Art G. H. Hardy A Mathematician's Apology George David Birkhoff Aesthetic Measure Douglas Hofstadter Gödel, Escher, Bach Nikos Salingaros The 'Life' of a Carpet Publications Journal of Mathematics and the Arts Lumen Naturae Making Mathematics with Needlework Rhythm of Structure Viewpoints: Mathematical Perspective and Fractal Geometry in Art Organizations Ars Mathematica The Bridges Organi
athematical Perspective and Fractal Geometry in Art Organizations Ars Mathematica The Bridges Organization European Society for Mathematics and the Arts Goudreau Museum of Mathematics in Art and Science Institute For Figuring Mathemalchemy National Museum of Mathematics Related Droste effect Mathematical beauty Patterns in nature Sacred geometry Category v t e Leonardo da Vinci 's Mona Lisa Lisa del Giocondo (subject) Replicas Isleworth Mona Lisa (16th century) Mona Lisa (Prado, c. 1503 –1516) H
el Giocondo (subject) Replicas Isleworth Mona Lisa (16th century) Mona Lisa (Prado, c. 1503 –1516) Hermitage Mona Lisa ( c. 1550 ) L.H.O.O.Q. (1919) Mini Lisa (2013) Related Replicas and reinterpretations Speculations Male Mona Lisa theories Two– Mona Lisa theory Timeline of fictional stories about the Mona Lisa La Joconde nue 1911 theft Eduardo de Valfierno Yves Chaudron Vincenzo Peruggia On screen The Theft of the Mona Lisa (1931) Arsène Lupin (1932) The Mona Lisa Has Been Stolen (1966) City o
en The Theft of the Mona Lisa (1931) Arsène Lupin (1932) The Mona Lisa Has Been Stolen (1966) City of Death (1979) Mona Lisa Descending a Staircase (1992) Mona Lisa's Revenge (2009) Glass Onion: A Knives Out Mystery (2022) Music Mona Lisa (1915 opera) " Mona Lisa " (1950 song) " Mona Lisa Lost Her Smile " (1984 song) " Lisa Mona Lisa " (1988 song) " The Ballad of Mona Lisa " (2011 song) " The Mona Lisa " (2013 song) In Search of Mona Lisa (2019 EP) Literature The Second Mrs. Giaconda (1975) I, M
 Lisa " (2013 song) In Search of Mona Lisa (2019 EP) Literature The Second Mrs. Giaconda (1975) I, Mona Lisa (2006) The Smile (2008) v t e High Renaissance Principal proponents Donato Bramante Giorgione Michelangelo Raphael Titian Leonardo da Vinci Other artists Mariotto Albertinelli Pellegrino Aretusi Fra Bartolomeo Ludovico Beretta Moretto da Brescia Gasparo Cairano Giulio Clovio Antonio da Correggio Piero di Cosimo Bernardino delle Croci Girolamo Genga Lorenzo Lotto Maffeo Olivieri Baldassare
eggio Piero di Cosimo Bernardino delle Croci Girolamo Genga Lorenzo Lotto Maffeo Olivieri Baldassare Peruzzi Sebastiano del Piombo Antonio da Sangallo the Younger Andrea del Sarto Il Sodoma Tamagnino Palma Vecchio Antonio Vassilacchi Major works The Last Supper ( c. 1492–1498 ) Pietà (1498–1499) San Pietro in Montorio (1500) David (1501–1504) Mona Lisa ( c. 1502–1516 ) St. Peter's Basilica (1506–1513) Sistine Chapel ceiling (1508–1512) Raphael Rooms (1509–1524) Transfiguration (1516–1520) The La
513) Sistine Chapel ceiling (1508–1512) Raphael Rooms (1509–1524) Transfiguration (1516–1520) The Last Judgment (1536–1541) Related Art patronage of Julius II Jacob Burckhardt Johann Joachim Winckelmann Leonardeschi Giorgio Vasari The Lives Portals : Anatomy Architecture Astronomy Biography Earth Sciences Engineering History of science Italy Literature Mathematics Music Painting Science Stars Technology The arts Visual arts Leonardo da Vinci at Wikipedia's sister projects : Media from Commons Ne
nology The arts Visual arts Leonardo da Vinci at Wikipedia's sister projects : Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Data from Wikidata Authority control databases International FAST ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Norway Chile Spain France BnF data Argentina Catalonia Germany Italy Israel Finland Belgium United States Sweden Latvia Taiwan Japan Czech Republic Australia Greece Korea Romania Croatia Netherlands Poland Portugal R
via Taiwan Japan Czech Republic Australia Greece Korea Romania Croatia Netherlands Poland Portugal Russia Vatican Academics CiNii MathSciNet Mathematics Genealogy Project ORCID zbMATH 2 Artists Auckland Scientific illustrators KulturNav 2 MusicBrainz Museum of Modern Art Victoria Prado RKD Artists Städel ULAN People BMLO Italian People Deutsche Biographie Structurae Trove Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland NARA RISM SNAC IdRef Te Papa (New Zealand) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.o
ry of Switzerland NARA RISM SNAC IdRef Te Papa (New Zealand) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Leonardo_da_Vinci&oldid=1226990214 " Categories : Leonardo da Vinci 1452 births 1519 deaths 15th-century Italian mathematicians 15th-century Italian painters 15th-century Italian scientists 15th-century Italian sculptors 15th-century people from the Republic of Florence 16th-century Italian mathematicians 16th-century Italian painters 16th-century Italian scientists 16th-centu
tury Italian mathematicians 16th-century Italian painters 16th-century Italian scientists 16th-century Italian sculptors 16th-century people from the Republic of Florence Ambassadors of the Republic of Florence Ballistics experts Fabulists Painters from Florence Italian botanical illustrators Fluid dynamicists History of anatomy Italian anatomists Italian caricaturists Italian civil engineers 16th-century Italian inventors Italian male painters Italian male sculptors Italian military engineers I
-century Italian inventors Italian male painters Italian male sculptors Italian military engineers Italian physiologists Italian Renaissance humanists Italian Renaissance painters Italian Renaissance sculptors Italian Roman Catholics Mathematical artists People prosecuted under anti-homosexuality laws Philosophical theists Physiognomists Italian Renaissance architects Renaissance scientists Burials in France Writers who illustrated their own writing Hidden categories: Pages with non-numeric form
s in France Writers who illustrated their own writing Hidden categories: Pages with non-numeric formatnum arguments Pages using the Phonos extension Articles containing French-language text Pages with Italian IPA Pages including recorded pronunciations Articles containing Italian-language text CS1 Italian-language sources (it) CS1 French-language sources (fr) Webarchive template wayback links CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wiki
 long volume value Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Good articles EngvarB from May 2024 Use dmy dates from May 2024 Biography with signature Articles with hCards Articles containing Spanish-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2023 All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification 
tatements from January 2023 All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from February 2023 Pages containing links to subscription-only content Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with LibriVox links Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articl
 Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with WorldCat Entities identifiers Articles with BIBSYS identifiers Articles with BNC identifiers Articles with BNE identifiers Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with BNFdata identifiers Articles with BNMM identifiers Articles with CANTICN identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with ICCU identifiers Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with KANTO identifiers Articles with KBR
ith ICCU identifiers Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with KANTO identifiers Articles with KBR identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with Libris identifiers Articles with LNB identifiers Articles with NCL identifiers Articles with NDL identifiers Articles with NKC identifiers Articles with NLA identifiers Articles with NLG identifiers Articles with NLK identifiers Articles with NLR identifiers Articles with NSK identifiers Articles with NTA identifiers Articles with PLWABN id
 NLR identifiers Articles with NSK identifiers Articles with NTA identifiers Articles with PLWABN identifiers Articles with PortugalA identifiers Articles with RSL identifiers Articles with VcBA identifiers Articles with CINII identifiers Articles with MATHSN identifiers Articles with MGP identifiers Articles with ORCID identifiers Articles with ZBMATH identifiers Articles with AAG identifiers Articles with DSI identifiers Articles with KULTURNAV identifiers Articles with MusicBrainz identifiers
icles with DSI identifiers Articles with KULTURNAV identifiers Articles with MusicBrainz identifiers Articles with MoMA identifiers Articles with NGV identifiers Articles with Prado identifiers Articles with RKDartists identifiers Articles with Städel identifiers Articles with ULAN identifiers Articles with BMLO identifiers Articles with DBI identifiers Articles with DTBIO identifiers Articles with Structurae person identifiers Articles with Trove identifiers Articles with HDS identifiers Articl
h Structurae person identifiers Articles with Trove identifiers Articles with HDS identifiers Articles with NARA identifiers Articles with RISM identifiers Articles with SNAC-ID identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers Articles with TePapa identifiers This page was last edited on 3 June 2024, at 00:22 (UTC) . Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 4.0 ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikip
tional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view
URL: https://www.history.com/topics/renaissance/leonardo-da-vinci
Title: Leonardo da Vinci: Facts, Paintings & Inventions - HISTORY
Content:
Leonardo da Vinci: Facts, Paintings & Inventions - HISTORY Skip to content Shows This Day In History Schedule Topics Stories History Classics Live TV Your Profile Your Profile History Find History on Facebook (Opens in a new window) Find History on Twitter (Opens in a new window) Find History on YouTube (Opens in a new window) Find History on Instagram (Opens in a new window) Find History on TikTok (Opens in a new window) Email Updates Live TV History Classics Shows This Day In History Schedule 
k (Opens in a new window) Email Updates Live TV History Classics Shows This Day In History Schedule Topics Stories Videos History Podcasts History Vault Home Topics Renaissance Leonardo da Vinci Leonardo da Vinci By: History.com Editors Updated: July 13, 2022 | Original: December 2, 2009 copy page link Print Page DEA / A. DAGLI ORTI/Getty Images Table of Contents When Was Leonardo da Vinci Born? Early Career 'The Last Supper'&nbsp; 'Mona Lisa' Inventions and Philosophy&nbsp; Da Vinci’s Notebooks
arly Career 'The Last Supper'&nbsp; 'Mona Lisa' Inventions and Philosophy&nbsp; Da Vinci’s Notebooks How Did Leonardo da Vinci Die? Leonardo da Vinci was a painter, engineer, architect, inventor, and student of all things scientific. His natural genius crossed so many disciplines that he epitomized the term “ Renaissance man.” Today he remains best known for two of his paintings, " Mona Lisa " and "The Last Supper." Largely self-educated, he filled dozens of secret notebooks with inventions, obs
 "The Last Supper." Largely self-educated, he filled dozens of secret notebooks with inventions, observations and theories about pursuits from aeronautics to human anatomy. His combination of intellect and imagination allowed him to create, at least on paper, such inventions as the bicycle, the helicopter and an airplane based on the physiology and flying ability of a bat. When Was Leonardo da Vinci Born? Da Vinci was born in Anchiano, Tuscany (now Italy), in 1452, close to the town of Vinci tha
ci Born? Da Vinci was born in Anchiano, Tuscany (now Italy), in 1452, close to the town of Vinci that provided the surname we associate with him today. In his own time he was known just as Leonardo or as “Il Florentine,” since he lived near Florence—and was famed as an artist, inventor and thinker. Did you know? Leonardo da Vinci’s father, an attorney and notary, and his peasant mother were never married to one another, and Leonardo was the only child they had together. With other partners, they
married to one another, and Leonardo was the only child they had together. With other partners, they had a total of 17 other children, da Vinci’s half-siblings. Da Vinci’s parents weren’t married, and his mother, Caterina, a peasant, wed another man while da Vinci was very young and began a new family. Beginning around age 5, he lived on the estate in Vinci that belonged to the family of his father, Ser Peiro, an attorney and notary. Da Vinci’s uncle, who had a particular appreciation for nature
r, Ser Peiro, an attorney and notary. Da Vinci’s uncle, who had a particular appreciation for nature that da Vinci grew to share, also helped raise him. Early Career Da Vinci received no formal education beyond basic reading, writing and math, but his father appreciated his artistic talent and apprenticed him at around age 15 to the noted sculptor and painter Andrea del Verrocchio of Florence. For about a decade, da Vinci refined his painting and sculpting techniques and trained in mechanical ar
 about a decade, da Vinci refined his painting and sculpting techniques and trained in mechanical arts. When he was 20, in 1472, the painters’ guild of Florence offered da Vinci membership, but he remained with Verrocchio until he became an independent master in 1478. Around 1482, he began to paint his first commissioned work, The Adoration of the Magi, for Florence’s San Donato, a Scopeto monastery. However, da Vinci never completed that piece, because shortly thereafter he relocated to Milan t
ry. However, da Vinci never completed that piece, because shortly thereafter he relocated to Milan to work for the ruling Sforza clan, serving as an engineer, painter, architect, designer of court festivals and, most notably, a sculptor. The family asked da Vinci to create a magnificent 16-foot-tall equestrian statue, in bronze, to honor dynasty founder Francesco Sforza. Da Vinci worked on the project on and off for 12 years, and in 1493 a clay model was ready to display. Imminent war, however, 
ject on and off for 12 years, and in 1493 a clay model was ready to display. Imminent war, however, meant repurposing the bronze earmarked for the sculpture into cannons, and the clay model was destroyed in the conflict after the ruling Sforza duke fell from power in 1499. 'The Last Supper' Although relatively few of da Vinci’s paintings and sculptures survive—in part because his total output was quite small—two of his extant works are among the world’s most well-known and admired paintings. The
quite small—two of his extant works are among the world’s most well-known and admired paintings. The first is da Vinci’s “The Last Supper,” painted during his time in Milan, from about 1495 to 1498. A tempera and oil mural on plaster, “The Last Supper” was created for the refectory of the city’s Monastery of Santa Maria delle Grazie. Also known as “The Cenacle,” this work measures about 15 by 29 feet and is the artist’s only surviving fresco. It depicts the Passover dinner during which Jesus Chr
eet and is the artist’s only surviving fresco. It depicts the Passover dinner during which Jesus Christ addresses the Apostles and says, “One of you shall betray me.” One of the painting’s stellar features is each Apostle’s distinct emotive expression and body language. Its composition, in which Jesus is centered among yet isolated from the Apostles, has influenced generations of painters. 'Mona Lisa' When Milan was invaded by the French in 1499 and the Sforza family fled, da Vinci escaped as we
isa' When Milan was invaded by the French in 1499 and the Sforza family fled, da Vinci escaped as well, possibly first to Venice and then to Florence. There, he painted a series of portraits that included “La Gioconda,” a 21-by-31-inch work that’s best known today as “Mona Lisa.” Painted between approximately 1503 and 1506, the woman depicted—especially because of her mysterious slight smile—has been the subject of speculation for centuries. In the past she was often thought to be Mona Lisa Gher
een the subject of speculation for centuries. In the past she was often thought to be Mona Lisa Gherardini, a courtesan, but current scholarship indicates that she was Lisa del Giocondo, wife of Florentine merchant Francisco del Giocondo. Today, the portrait—the only da Vinci portrait from this period that survives—is housed at the Louvre Museum in Paris, France, where it attracts millions of visitors each year. Around 1506, da Vinci returned to Milan, along with a group of his students and disc
tors each year. Around 1506, da Vinci returned to Milan, along with a group of his students and disciples, including young aristocrat Francesco Melzi, who would be Leonardo’s closest companion until the artist’s death. Ironically, the victor over the Duke Ludovico Sforza, Gian Giacomo Trivulzio, commissioned da Vinci to sculpt his grand equestrian-statue tomb. It, too, was never completed (this time because Trivulzio scaled back his plan). Da Vinci spent seven years in Milan, followed by three m
me because Trivulzio scaled back his plan). Da Vinci spent seven years in Milan, followed by three more in Rome after Milan once again became inhospitable because of political strife. Inventions and Philosophy Da Vinci’s interests ranged far beyond fine art. He studied nature, mechanics, anatomy, physics, architecture, weaponry and more, often creating accurate, workable designs for machines like the bicycle, helicopter, submarine and military tank that would not come to fruition for centuries. 
the bicycle, helicopter, submarine and military tank that would not come to fruition for centuries. He was, wrote Sigmund Freud, “like a man who awoke too early in the darkness, while the others were all still asleep.” Several themes could be said to unite da Vinci’s eclectic interests. Most notably, he believed that sight was mankind’s most important sense and that “saper vedere” (“knowing how to see”) was crucial to living all aspects of life fully. He saw science and art as complementary rath
 see”) was crucial to living all aspects of life fully. He saw science and art as complementary rather than distinct disciplines, and thought that ideas formulated in one realm could—and should—inform the other. Probably because of his abundance of diverse interests, da Vinci failed to complete a significant number of his paintings and projects. He spent a great deal of time immersing himself in nature, testing scientific laws, dissecting bodies (human and animal) and thinking and writing about 
ature, testing scientific laws, dissecting bodies (human and animal) and thinking and writing about his observations. Da Vinci’s Notebooks At some point in the early 1490s, da Vinci began filling notebooks related to four broad themes—painting, architecture, mechanics and human anatomy—creating thousands of pages of neatly drawn illustrations and densely penned commentary, some of which (thanks to left-handed “mirror script”) was indecipherable to others. The notebooks—often referred to as da Vi
 left-handed “mirror script”) was indecipherable to others. The notebooks—often referred to as da Vinci’s manuscripts and “codices”—are housed today in museum collections after having been scattered after his death. The Codex Atlanticus, for instance, includes a plan for a 65-foot mechanical bat, essentially a flying machine based on the physiology of the bat and on the principles of aeronautics and physics. Other notebooks contained da Vinci’s anatomical studies of the human skeleton, muscles, 
nd physics. Other notebooks contained da Vinci’s anatomical studies of the human skeleton, muscles, brain, and digestive and reproductive systems, which brought new understanding of the human body to a wider audience. However, because they weren’t published in the 1500s, da Vinci’s notebooks had little influence on scientific advancement in the Renaissance period. How Did Leonardo da Vinci Die? Da Vinci left Italy for good in 1516, when French ruler Francis I generously offered him the title of 
 Vinci left Italy for good in 1516, when French ruler Francis I generously offered him the title of “Premier Painter and Engineer and Architect to the King,” which afforded him the opportunity to paint and draw at his leisure while living in a country manor house, the Château of Cloux, near Amboise in France. Although accompanied by Melzi, to whom he would leave his estate, the bitter tone in drafts of some of his correspondence from this period indicate that da Vinci’s final years may not have 
ts of some of his correspondence from this period indicate that da Vinci’s final years may not have been very happy ones. (Melzi would go on to marry and have a son, whose heirs, upon his death, sold da Vinci’s estate.) Da Vinci died at Cloux (now Clos-Lucé) in 1519 at age 67. He was buried nearby in the palace church of Saint-Florentin. The French Revolution nearly obliterated the church, and its remains were completely demolished in the early 1800s, making it impossible to identify da Vinci’s 
 remains were completely demolished in the early 1800s, making it impossible to identify da Vinci’s exact gravesite. HISTORY Vault: World History Stream scores of videos about world history, from the Crusades to the Third Reich. WATCH NOW By: History.com Editors HISTORY.com works with a wide range of writers and editors to create accurate and informative content. All articles are regularly reviewed and updated by the HISTORY.com team. Articles with the “HISTORY.com Editors” byline have been writ
d and updated by the HISTORY.com team. Articles with the “HISTORY.com Editors” byline have been written or edited by the HISTORY.com editors, including Amanda Onion , Missy Sullivan , Matt Mullen and Christian Zapata. Citation Information Article Title Leonardo da Vinci Author History.com Editors Website Name HISTORY URL https://www.history.com/topics/renaissance/leonardo-da-vinci Date Accessed June 29, 2024 Publisher A&E Television Networks Last Updated July 13, 2022 Original Published Date Dec
ne 29, 2024 Publisher A&E Television Networks Last Updated July 13, 2022 Original Published Date December 2, 2009 Fact Check We strive for accuracy and fairness. But if you see something that doesn't look right, click here to contact us! HISTORY reviews and updates its content regularly to ensure it is complete and accurate. Print Page Sign up for Inside History Get HISTORY’s most fascinating stories delivered to your inbox three times a week. Sign Up By submitting your information, you agree to
ies delivered to your inbox three times a week. Sign Up By submitting your information, you agree to receive emails from HISTORY and A+E Networks. You can opt out at any time. You must be 16 years or older and a resident of the United States. More details : Privacy Notice | Terms of Use | Contact Us A+E Networks Our Family of Brands History Education History Vault Mobile/Apps News Share Your Opinion Follow History d p m + Biography Crime and Investigation History en Espanol LRW Military History 
on Follow History d p m + Biography Crime and Investigation History en Espanol LRW Military History Ad Choices Advertise With Us Accessibility Support Copyright Policy Corporate Information Employment Opportunities FAQ/Contact Us Privacy Notice Cookie Notice Terms Of Use TV Parental Guidelines Contact Us Copyright Policy Privacy Policy Terms of Use Ad Choices Accessibility Support © 2024 , A&E Television Networks, LLC. All Rights Reserved.
evision Networks, LLC. All Rights Reserved.
URL: https://www.worldhistory.org/Leonardo_da_Vinci/
Title: Leonardo da Vinci - World History Encyclopedia
Content:
Leonardo da Vinci - World History Encyclopedia Facebook Membership No ads Encyclopedia Index Timeline Maps Book Reviews Weights & Measures Translations Education Teaching Materials Link Database Quizzes Primary Sources Collections School Subscription Media Media Library Audio Articles Podcast Youtube Channel Contribute Submissions Needed Content Style Guide Terms & Conditions Volunteer Donate Shop Books Map Posters Magazines Wall Charts Clothing About About Our Team Editorial Policy Annual Repor
 Books Map Posters Magazines Wall Charts Clothing About About Our Team Editorial Policy Annual Reports Membership Contact Login Login Register Leonardo da Vinci Contents Definition by Mark Cartwright published on 07 September 2020 Available in other languages: Dutch , French , Italian , Portuguese , Spanish , Turkish Subscribe to topic Subscribe to author Leonardo da Vinci Self-portrait Leonardo da Vinci (Public Domain) Leonardo da Vinci (1452-1519) was an Italian Renaissance artist, architect, 
a Vinci (Public Domain) Leonardo da Vinci (1452-1519) was an Italian Renaissance artist, architect, engineer, and scientist. He is renowned for his ability to observe and capture nature, scientific phenomena, and human emotions in all media . Leonardo’s innovative masterpieces demonstrate a mastery of light, perspective, and overall effect. His most-loved works include the Mona Lisa portrait and The Last Supper mural. Considered one of the greatest minds in history, Leonardo's approach to acquir
he Last Supper mural. Considered one of the greatest minds in history, Leonardo's approach to acquiring knowledge on everything from anatomy to mechanics involved understanding both the theory and practice of any given subject. In short, by combining the skills of the artisan with those of the scholar, Leonardo's vision demonstrated the benefits of a completely new approach to understanding the present world and just how to best create new and marvellous things for a future one. Remove Ads Adver
esent world and just how to best create new and marvellous things for a future one. Remove Ads Advertisement Early Life Leonardo was born on 15 April 1452 CE, the illegitimate son of a lawyer from the town of Vinci near Florence. A gifted child, especially in music and drawing, c. 1464 CE the young Leonardo was sent off to pursue a career as an artist and study as an apprentice in the workshop of Andrea del Verrocchio (c. 1435-1488 CE). Other notable future artists then at the workshop included 
Andrea del Verrocchio (c. 1435-1488 CE). Other notable future artists then at the workshop included Sandro Botticelli (1445-1510 CE) and Pietro Perugino (c. 1450-1523 CE). Here Leonardo would have learnt to master sketching and painting techniques, as well as the latest trends like the use of classicising ornamental detail in paintings. One of the young Leonardo's first contributions to Renaissance art may have been the kneeling angel in Verrocchio's Baptism of Christ painting (c. 1470 CE, Uffiz
e art may have been the kneeling angel in Verrocchio's Baptism of Christ painting (c. 1470 CE, Uffizi, Florence). Completing his apprenticeship in 1472 CE, Leonardo became a paid assistant to Verrocchio and was registered as a master in the painter's guild of Florence. YouTube Follow us on YouTube! "A painter is not admirable unless he is universal", Leonardo da Vinci. Other skills Leonardo perfected early on in his career included chiaroscuro (the contrasting use of light and shade) and sfumato
ted early on in his career included chiaroscuro (the contrasting use of light and shade) and sfumato (the transition of lighter into darker colours). The former technique is especially evident in his c. 1503 CE coloured charcoal illustration Virgin and Child with St. Anne (National Gallery, London) and its c. 1505 painted version (Louvre, Paris ). The technique of sfumato is well-illustrated in Leonardo's c. 1483 CE oil on panel painting Virgin of the Rocks (Louvre). Leonardo was also an innovat
onardo's c. 1483 CE oil on panel painting Virgin of the Rocks (Louvre). Leonardo was also an innovator, though. His c. 1472 CE The Annunciation (Uffizi) illustrates the artist followed some Renaissance trends, for example, the classical details of Mary's book rest, but also ignored others such as his obvious rejection of symmetry in the background trees. Remove Ads Advertisement Virgin and Child with St. Anne by Leonardo da Vinci National Gallery Collection (Public Domain) Paolo Giovio, Bishop o
ith St. Anne by Leonardo da Vinci National Gallery Collection (Public Domain) Paolo Giovio, Bishop of Nocera, art historian and contemporary of Leonardo's, gives in his mini-biography the following summary of the artist's personality: He had a character which was very amiable, impressive and generous, and he had the most beautiful appearance. He was a splendid critic and inventor of all things elegant and delightful, especially in theatrical displays. He sang to his own accompaniment on the lyre
gant and delightful, especially in theatrical displays. He sang to his own accompaniment on the lyre , and he was on excellent footing with all the princes of his time. (Woods, 269) Notes & Sketches Leonardo was far from being restricted to art and his interests were wide indeed, encompassing just about all the physical world. He studied architecture , engineering, geometry, perspective, mechanics, and hydraulics to satisfy himself just how things worked and why they appeared as they do to the h
, and hydraulics to satisfy himself just how things worked and why they appeared as they do to the human eye. The natural world was not neglected with studies in anatomy, botany, zoology, and geology. Leonardo kept notebooks throughout his life in which he recorded the results of his investigations and his ideas for new inventions. Machines the artist conjured up include cranes, paddlewheel boats, tanks, cannons, apparatus to breathe underwater, and even flying contraptions. The only element man
 tanks, cannons, apparatus to breathe underwater, and even flying contraptions. The only element many of these designs lacked was an internal combustion engine, not to be invented, of course, until centuries later. The notes in these books are often interspersed with sketches, many being miniature masterpieces in themselves. Perhaps the most famous of all these sketches is the Vitruvian Man drawing (see below). Remove Ads Advertisement In addition, Leonardo wrote down his thoughts on painting an
g (see below). Remove Ads Advertisement In addition, Leonardo wrote down his thoughts on painting and his observation of effects seen in nature he considered useful to the artist. As the man himself said, "a painter is not admirable unless he is universal", although he was appreciative that mastery of any subject takes time and noted that impatience was the mother of stupidity (Hale, 183). These notes and treatises were no doubt useful in Leonardo's role as a tutor to young artists in his own wo
otes and treatises were no doubt useful in Leonardo's role as a tutor to young artists in his own workshop. A curiosity of them is that many are written as mirror script , that is in the reverse direction of normal handwriting. Lady with an Ermine by Leonardo da Vinci Leonardo da Vinci (Public Domain) Besides stacks of notebooks, Leonardo built up an impressive personal library which, by 1503 CE, contained 116 books covering such subjects as medieval and Renaissance medicine , religion , and mat
contained 116 books covering such subjects as medieval and Renaissance medicine , religion , and mathematics. The collection included such seminal works as Natural History by Pliny, Geography by Ptolemy I and On Warfare by Roberto Valturio. Leonardo was interested in languages, too, particularly Latin, which he attempted to teach himself in order to read medieval manuscripts in their original form; long lists of Latin words can be found in his notebooks. Milan Leonardo's versatility is further i
; long lists of Latin words can be found in his notebooks. Milan Leonardo's versatility is further illustrated in his employment by Ludovico Sforza (1452-1508 CE), the Duke of Milan. Leonardo had moved to the city in 1482 CE and he acted as the principal Sforza military and naval engineer, on the one hand, and master painter and sculptor, on the other. Leonardo also produced ingenious automata for Ludovico's festivals and these included moving planets with their namesake gods inside. The master 
 Ludovico's festivals and these included moving planets with their namesake gods inside. The master turned his hand to a massive bronze equestrian statue of Francesco Sforza (1401-1466 CE), founder of that dynasty, but the project never got beyond the terracotta model stage - by no means the only work Leonardo never finished. Sketches survive showing the general form and Leonardo attempting to work out just how to make and transport the massive pieces of bronze for final assembly. Remove Ads Adv
k out just how to make and transport the massive pieces of bronze for final assembly. Remove Ads Advertisement Leonardo's notebooks were influential both for their theories on painting & His diagrams on perspective. Leonardo painted Ludovico Sforza's mistress Cecilia Gallerani in his The Lady with an Ermine c. 1490 CE (National Museum Krakow, Poland). His greatest work in the 17 years he spent in Milan, though, was The Last Supper mural (see below). It was in this period, specifically the 1490s 
Milan, though, was The Last Supper mural (see below). It was in this period, specifically the 1490s CE, that Leonardo pioneered the new medium of red chalk drawings on treated paper. The many surviving examples of these drawings include a famous self-portrait which shows the artist aged and long-bearded. The sketch is now in the Biblioteca Reale of Turin. Further Travels & France Leonardo visited Venice in 1500 CE. Around this time he painted his erotic version of the Leda and the Swan story fro
Venice in 1500 CE. Around this time he painted his erotic version of the Leda and the Swan story from Greek mythology which is now lost, although sketches survive. In 1502 CE Leonardo worked in Rome where he was commissioned by the statesman Cesare Borgia (1475-1507 CE) to sort out the city's canals. He also mapped the city and surrounding regions, as well as planning improvements to harbours. One of his most celebrated maps is that of Imola which, made in 1502 CE, shows every structure from abo
 of his most celebrated maps is that of Imola which, made in 1502 CE, shows every structure from above on a precise scale, the first such map to be made. By 1503 CE Leonardo was back in Florence to work on proposals for a battle scene mural in the city's Council Hall. Leonardo's now lost 'cartoon' for the work showed the 1449 CE Battle of Anghiari between the armies of Florence and Milan. The early years of the 16th century CE also saw Leonardo complete a painting he had probably been working on
y years of the 16th century CE also saw Leonardo complete a painting he had probably been working on sporadically, the Mona Lisa portrait (see below). Tomb of Leonardo da Vinci Mark Cartwright (CC BY-NC-SA) In 1517 CE Leonardo moved on to France, where his skills were appreciated by Francis I of France (r. 1515-1547 CE), a great patron of Renaissance artists and architects. Leonardo, specifically invited by the French king, may have been involved in the initial design stage for Francis' Chateau 
invited by the French king, may have been involved in the initial design stage for Francis' Chateau de Chambord on the Loire River, built from 1519 to 1547 CE. The chateau's ingenious double spiral staircase is frequently credited to Leonardo even if firm evidence is lacking. Remove Ads Advertisement Leonardo's final work of art was his c. 1515 CE painting St. John the Baptist (Louvre), although he seems to have focussed more on scientific enquiry in the latter stages of his life. Leonardo died 
e seems to have focussed more on scientific enquiry in the latter stages of his life. Leonardo died at his French home, Chateau Cloux (aka Clos Lucé), on 2 May 1519 CE and he was entombed within the Chapel of Saint Hubert just next to the Chateau d'Amboise. Reputation & Legacy The sheer diversity of work left by Leonardo has astounded historians and critics ever since his death . As the Renaissance historian Jacob Burckhardt (1818-1887 CE) famously stated, "the colossal outlines of Leonardo's na
e historian Jacob Burckhardt (1818-1887 CE) famously stated, "the colossal outlines of Leonardo's nature can never be more than dimly and distantly conceived" (104). Leonardo's artistic works were influential on fellow Renaissance artists because of their mastery of composition and light, the contrapposto posture of his figures (i.e. the asymmetry between the upper and lower body), and the sheer invention and variety of their compositions. However, it is also true to say that some elements of Le
nvention and variety of their compositions. However, it is also true to say that some elements of Leonardo's works were so subtle and skilled that few artists had any hope of imitating them. Then, just as today, much of his art was greatly admired but not wholly understood by everyone. Nevertheless, those who could see did see. The master's work for the Battle of Anghiari, several copies of which were made, was influential on such gifted artists as Raphael (1483-1520 CE) who greatly admired the 
were made, was influential on such gifted artists as Raphael (1483-1520 CE) who greatly admired the writhing mass of humanity seemingly captured at a moment frozen in time. This is but one example of the master's influence, just one product of what the mathematician and artists' frequent collaborator Luca Pacioli (c. 1447-1517 CE) already called "the divine left hand" (Campbell, 387). Leonardo's fame even reached as far as Constantinople where the Sultan of the Ottoman Empire Bayezid II (r. 1481
ame even reached as far as Constantinople where the Sultan of the Ottoman Empire Bayezid II (r. 1481-1512 CE) invited him, without success, to his court. Love History? Sign up for our free weekly email newsletter! Leonardo's notebooks, not published until after 1570 CE, were influential both for their theories on painting and his diagrams on perspective but also on the pursuit of knowledge in general. Simply the way that Leonardo illustrated certain subjects (from an embryo to a cathedral), with
ral. Simply the way that Leonardo illustrated certain subjects (from an embryo to a cathedral), with his use of cross-section, perspective, scaled precision, and repeating the subject but from different viewpoints, would all influence draughtsmanship in architecture and the creation of diagrams in science ever after. Above all, Leonardo had shown that practice and theory could not and should not be separated. The great master demonstrated in his own person that a full knowledge of any subject re
e separated. The great master demonstrated in his own person that a full knowledge of any subject required a combination of the skills of the artisan, the flair and imagination of the artist, and the meticulous research and reasoning of a scholar. Consequently, the approaches to a great many subjects, but especially art, architecture, engineering, and science, were fundamentally changed forever. Death of Leonardo da Vinci Babeth Étiève-Cartwright (CC BY-NC-SA) Masterpieces Mona Lisa The Mona Lis
eath of Leonardo da Vinci Babeth Étiève-Cartwright (CC BY-NC-SA) Masterpieces Mona Lisa The Mona Lisa ( La Gioconda in Italian) is an oil on wood panel portrait of an unidentified woman made by Leonardo between c. 1503 and 1506 CE. It measures 98 x 53 centimetres (38 x 21 inches), a relatively small size that often surprises modern viewers used to seeing this iconic image in larger reprints. The painting, rather than merely capturing the physical features of the sitter, attempts to capture the v
ainting, rather than merely capturing the physical features of the sitter, attempts to capture the very mood and thoughts of the subject at a specific moment in time, what Leonardo called "the motions of the mind" (Campbell, 257). Other effects include the use of aerial perspective such as the recession of colour into the furthest background of a watery-looking landscape and the difference in gradation of colour from the top to the bottom of the painting. Mona Lisa Centre for Research and Restor
ation of colour from the top to the bottom of the painting. Mona Lisa Centre for Research and Restoration of the Museums of France (Public Domain) The casual posture of the lady and the position of her hands forms, with the head as the top point, the classic triangle shape that many Renaissance artists were experimenting with in their paintings. Light and dark colours are used expertly to emphasise the oval face and soft hands of the lady while the contours of these combine convex and concave li
e the oval face and soft hands of the lady while the contours of these combine convex and concave lines which create an illusion of supple movement. Finally, the three-quarter view of the lady creates another suggestion of movement as she seems to have just that moment turned to regard the viewer. That Leonardo is exclusively interested in presenting a view of a living-breathing individual in intimate contact with the viewer is further evidenced by the lack of any identifying title and the total
mate contact with the viewer is further evidenced by the lack of any identifying title and the total lack of jewellery or other symbols of wealth which were typical of portraits up to that point. The work was immediately influential, inspiring artists like the young Raphael in his own portrait painting such as Maddalena Strozzi and Baldassare Castiglione . Leonardo must have been pleased with the Mona Lisa as he never parted with it during his lifetime and the picture is today one of the star at
Mona Lisa as he never parted with it during his lifetime and the picture is today one of the star attractions in the Louvre museum in Paris. The Last Supper The Last Supper ( Il Cenacolo in Italian) is a depiction of the final meal of Jesus Christ and his apostles which Leonardo painted on the wall of the refectory of Santa Maria delle Grazie, a residence of the Dominican order in Milan. This was a traditional subject to decorate monastic refectories, and the work was very likely commissioned by
a traditional subject to decorate monastic refectories, and the work was very likely commissioned by Ludovico Sforza, whose arms appear at the top of the mural. The work was completed c. 1498 CE. The triumph of the mural is the variation in emotional reactions displayed by each of the apostles as they hear that one of them will soon betray Jesus . The Last Supper by Leonardo da Vinci Leonardo da Vinci (Public Domain) Like any great work of art, The Last Supper has been subjected to all manner of
inci (Public Domain) Like any great work of art, The Last Supper has been subjected to all manner of interpretations. Some, for example, have seen Mary Magdalene in the figure who is intended to be the youthful St. John the Evangelist, sitting to the left of Jesus. Despite the intense interest in the peripheral figures and their meaning, the star of the scene is, of course, Jesus, who, presented as a central triangular form, is further brought to the viewer's attention by the precise perspective
s a central triangular form, is further brought to the viewer's attention by the precise perspective of the background which leads the eye irresistibly to the picture's very centre. The triangular motif is further repeated by the marked division in colour of Jesus's clothing and Leonardo organising the apostles into four distinct groups, each forming an approximate triangle with their collective bodies. Finally, amongst all the action and bustle of the gesticulating apostles, Jesus, with both ha
odies. Finally, amongst all the action and bustle of the gesticulating apostles, Jesus, with both hands on the table, is a vision of immobility, a calm and knowing centre in a storm of outrage and incomprehension. The work was immediately and hugely influential thanks to an engraving of it made by Marcantonio Raimondi (1480-1534 CE) which was distributed far and wide to interested artists. Unfortunately, things went wrong within a decade after completion when the paintwork began to crumble away.
nately, things went wrong within a decade after completion when the paintwork began to crumble away. This was because Leonardo had experimented with using oil paints and tempera on plaster in an undocumented technique instead of the familiar and much longer-lasting true fresco method. This dubious experimentation has challenged restorers of The Last Supper ever since. The mural also suffered in more recent times. First, a doorway was inexplicably made in the wall which intrudes into the bottom o
re recent times. First, a doorway was inexplicably made in the wall which intrudes into the bottom of the mural. Then, during the Second World War , the building was fire-bombed. Fortunately, the mural had been protected by a wall of sandbags and survived the bombing but it was exposed to the weather until adequate building repairs were made. A comprehensive restoration programme was conducted in the early 21st century CE, and it can be visited by the public, although numbers are limited and pre
the early 21st century CE, and it can be visited by the public, although numbers are limited and pre-booking is obligatory. Vitruvian Man by Leonardo da Vinci Luc Viatour (Public Domain) Vitruvian Man Although not a finished work of art (or ever intended to be), Leonardo's pen and ink on paper sketch known as the Vitruvian Man has become so famous that it is one of the images most associated with his name. Measuring 34 x 25 centimetres (13.5 x 10 inches), it was drawn c. 1492 CE and is now in th
his name. Measuring 34 x 25 centimetres (13.5 x 10 inches), it was drawn c. 1492 CE and is now in the Academia Gallery in Venice. The name of the work derives from Vitruvius (c. 90 - c. 20 BCE), the Roman architect who famously wrote De Architectura ( On Architecture ), an influential treatise which combines the history of ancient architecture and engineering with the author's personal experience and advice on the subject. Vitruvius' work was popular during the Renaissance when artists were re-e
and advice on the subject. Vitruvius' work was popular during the Renaissance when artists were re-examining the classical world for ideas and inspiration. In one particular passage, Vitruvius recommends that correct architectural proportions should be derived from a study of the proportions of the human body. The passage describes a human body within a circle and a square. Several Renaissance artists and architects, attracted by the idea that there was some mysterious and perhaps even divine re
ists and architects, attracted by the idea that there was some mysterious and perhaps even divine relationship between mathematics, the human body, and beauty, attempted to draw what Vitruvius had only described in words. Leonardo's Vitruvian Man is one such attempt. The man's naval is the centre of the circle and his fingertips and feet touch its circumference. A second male figure, superimposed on the other, is set within a square. The sketch is perhaps a metaphor for humanity's position at th
on the other, is set within a square. The sketch is perhaps a metaphor for humanity's position at the centre of an ordered universe, and as such it has become a defining symbol of the Renaissance and the ongoing enquiry into the exact relation between religion, science, and art. Did you like this definition? Subscribe to topic Related Content Books Cite This Work License Editorial Review This article has been reviewed by our editorial team before publication to ensure accuracy, reliability and a
cle has been reviewed by our editorial team before publication to ensure accuracy, reliability and adherence to academic standards in accordance with our editorial policy . Remove Ads Advertisement Bibliography Anderson, Christy. Renaissance Architecture. Oxford University Press, 2013. Burckhardt, Jacob. The Civilization of the Renaissance in Italy. Sagwan Press, 2015. Campbell, Gordon. The Oxford Illustrated History of the Renaissance. Oxford University Press, 2019. Hale, J.R. (ed). The Thames 
 Illustrated History of the Renaissance. Oxford University Press, 2019. Hale, J.R. (ed). The Thames & Hudson Dictionary of the Italian Renaissance by J. R. Hale. Thames & Hudson, 2020. Paoletti, John T. & Radke, Gary M. Art in Renaissance Italy. Pearson, 2011. Rundle, David. The Hutchinson Encyclopedia of the Renaissance. Hodder Arnold, 2000. Welch, Evelyn. Art in Renaissance Italy. Oxford University Press, 2001. Woods, Kim W. Making Renaissance Art. Yale University Press, 2007. Wyatt, Michael. 
ity Press, 2001. Woods, Kim W. Making Renaissance Art. Yale University Press, 2007. Wyatt, Michael. The Cambridge Companion to the Italian Renaissance. Cambridge University Press, 2014. World History Encyclopedia is an Amazon Associate and earns a commission on qualifying book purchases. Subscribe to this author About the Author Mark Cartwright Mark is a full-time writer, researcher, historian, and editor. Special interests include art, architecture, and discovering the ideas that all civilizati
d editor. Special interests include art, architecture, and discovering the ideas that all civilizations share. He holds an MA in Political Philosophy and is the WHE Publishing Director. Translations Dutch French Italian Portuguese Spanish Turkish We want people all over the world to learn about history. Help us and translate this definition into another language! Related Content Filters: All Definitions 33 Articles 8 Images 46 Videos 9 Collections 3 Definition Renaissance Art The art of the Rena
itions 33 Articles 8 Images 46 Videos 9 Collections 3 Definition Renaissance Art The art of the Renaissance period in Europe (1400-1600 CE) includes... Article Life in a Renaissance Artist's Workshop The majority of great Renaissance works of art were produced in... Article Patrons & Artists in Renaissance Italy During the Renaissance, most works of fine art were commissioned... Definition Renaissance Architecture Renaissance architecture originated in Italy and superseded the... Article Copies 
ance Architecture Renaissance architecture originated in Italy and superseded the... Article Copies & Fakes in Art during the Renaissance The Renaissance period witnessed a great renewed interest in the... Definition Red-Figure Pottery Red-figure Pottery is a style of Greek vase painting invented in... 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Next › Last » Free for the World, Supported by You World History Encyclopedia is a non-profit organization. For only $5 per month you can become a member and support our missi
ia is a non-profit organization. For only $5 per month you can become a member and support our mission to engage people with cultural heritage and to improve history education worldwide. Become a Member Donate Recommended Books Leonardo da Vinci Written by Isaacson, Walter , published by Simon & Schuster (2018) $14.02 Leonardo's Notebooks: Writing and Art of the Great Master Written by da Vinci, Leonardo & Suh, H. Anna , published by Black Dog & Leventhal (2013) $12.49 Leonardo da Vinci, 1452-15
eonardo & Suh, H. Anna , published by Black Dog & Leventhal (2013) $12.49 Leonardo da Vinci, 1452-1519: The Complete Paintings and Drawings Written by Z�llner, Frank , published by Taschen America Llc (2019) $45.14 Leonardo Da Vinci 1452-1519: The Graphic Work Written by Nathan, Johannes & Z�llner, Frank , published by Taschen America Llc (2014) $20.49 Leonardo Da Vinci: 1452-1519 The Complete Paintings Written by Z�llner, Frank , published by Taschen America Llc (2017) $15.79 World History Ency
ntings Written by Z�llner, Frank , published by Taschen America Llc (2017) $15.79 World History Encyclopedia is an Amazon Associate and earns a commission on qualifying book purchases. Add External Link External Links The Last Supper ted.com The Last Supper from Art History Podcast podbay.fm The Imagination of Leonardo da Vinci aspeninstitute.org YouTube youtube.com The Significance of Leonard da Vinci's Famous "Vitruvian Man" Drawing mymodernmet.com Leonardo da Vinci (1452–1519) | Essay | The M
Vinci's Famous "Vitruvian Man" Drawing mymodernmet.com Leonardo da Vinci (1452–1519) | Essay | The Metropolitan Museum of Art | Heilbrunn Timeline of Art History metmuseum.org Cite This Work APA Style Cartwright, M. (2020, September 07). Leonardo da Vinci . World History Encyclopedia . Retrieved from https://www.worldhistory.org/Leonardo_da_Vinci/ Chicago Style Cartwright, Mark. " Leonardo da Vinci ." World History Encyclopedia . Last modified September 07, 2020.
https://www.worldhistory.org/Leo
i ." World History Encyclopedia . Last modified September 07, 2020.
https://www.worldhistory.org/Leonardo_da_Vinci/. MLA Style Cartwright, Mark. " Leonardo da Vinci ." World History Encyclopedia . World History Encyclopedia, 07 Sep 2020. Web. 29 Jun 2024. License & Copyright Submitted by Mark Cartwright , published on 07 September 2020. The copyright holder has published this content under the following license: Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike . This license lets others rem
lowing license: Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike . This license lets others remix, tweak, and build upon this content non-commercially, as long as they credit the author and license their new creations under the identical terms. When republishing on the web a hyperlink back to the original content source URL must be included. Please note that content linked from this page may have different licensing terms. Remove Ads Advertisement Add Event Timeline Visual Timeline 1452 - 1
have different licensing terms. Remove Ads Advertisement Add Event Timeline Visual Timeline 1452 - 1519 Life of the great Italian artist, scientist and inventor Leonardo da Vinci . 15 Apr 1452 Birth of Renaissance artist and scientist Leonardo da Vinci . c. 1464 Leonardo da Vinci enrols as an apprentice in the workshop of Andrea del Verrocchio in Florence. 1472 Leonardo da Vinci completes his apprenticeship as an artist in Florence. c. 1472 Leonardo da Vinci completes his painting 'The Annunciat
enticeship as an artist in Florence. c. 1472 Leonardo da Vinci completes his painting 'The Annunciation'. 1482 Leonardo da Vinci moves to Milan where he works for Ludovico Sforza. c. 1483 Leonardo da Vinci completes his oil on panel painting 'Virgin of the Rocks'. c. 1490 Leonardo da Vinci completes his portrait of Ludovico Sforza’s mistress Cecilia Gallerani, 'The Lady with an Ermine'. c. 1492 Leonardo da Vinci completes his 'Vitruvian Man' sketch. c. 1498 Leonardo da Vinci completes his wall m
onardo da Vinci completes his 'Vitruvian Man' sketch. c. 1498 Leonardo da Vinci completes his wall mural 'The Last Supper' in Milan's Sante Maria delle Grazie. 1500 The Italian Renaissance artist Leonardo da Vinci visits Venice. 1502 Leonardo da Vinci moves to Rome where he works for Cesare Borgia to sort out the city ’s canals. 1502 Leonardo da Vinci produces his precise overhead view map of Imola, the first map of its kind. c. 1503 Leonard da Vinci completes his coloured charcoal illustration 
a, the first map of its kind. c. 1503 Leonard da Vinci completes his coloured charcoal illustration 'Virgin and Child with St. Anne'. 1503 Leonardo da Vinci returns to Florence to work on proposals for a battle scene mural in the city ’s Council Hall. c. 1503 - c. 1506 Leonardo da Vinci completes his painting the 'Mona Lisa'. c. 1515 Leonardo da Vinci completes his painting 'St. John the Baptist '. 1517 Leonardo da Vinci moves to France to work for Francis I of France. 2 May 1519 Leonardo da Vin
. 1517 Leonardo da Vinci moves to France to work for Francis I of France. 2 May 1519 Leonardo da Vinci dies at Chateau Cloux (aka Clos Lucé) in France. Remove Ads Advertisement Free Newsletter Our latest articles delivered to your inbox, once a week: Are you a...? History Enthusiast Teacher Student Librarian Remove Ads Advertisement Numerous educational institutions recommend us, including Oxford University .
Our publication has been reviewed for educational use by Common Sense Education , Inter
University .
Our publication has been reviewed for educational use by Common Sense Education , Internet Scout (University of Wisconsin) , Merlot (California State University) , OER Commons and the School Library Journal .
Please note that some of these recommendations are listed under our old name, Ancient History Encyclopedia. Our Mission Our mission is to engage people with cultural heritage and to improve history education worldwide. Follow Us Facebook About • Contact • Advertise • Privacy Po
 to improve history education worldwide. Follow Us Facebook About • Contact • Advertise • Privacy Policy • Partners • Supporters • Newsletter • Settings World History Publishing is a non-profit company registered in the United Kingdom. World History Foundation is a non-profit organization registered in Canada. Some Rights Reserved (2009-2024) under Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike license unless otherwise noted. The World History Encyclopedia logo is a registered trademark .
like license unless otherwise noted. The World History Encyclopedia logo is a registered trademark . Featured Partner
URL: https://www.biography.com/artists/leonardo-da-vinci
Title: Leonardo da Vinci - Paintings, Inventions & Quotes - Biography
Content:
Leonardo da Vinci - Paintings, Inventions & Quotes Search LGBTQ Pride History & Culture Musicians Movies & TV Athletes Artists Power & Politics Business Scholars & Educators Scientists Activists Notorious Figures BIO Buys Newsletter Privacy Notice Terms Of Use Skip to Content Pride Month Musicians Movies & TV Athletes Newsletter Sha’Carri Richardson Deals on Learning Tools Donald Sutherland Willie Mays Austin Butler Famous Artists Famous Painters Leonardo da Vinci Leonardo da Vinci Leonardo da V
 Mays Austin Butler Famous Artists Famous Painters Leonardo da Vinci Leonardo da Vinci Leonardo da Vinci was a Renaissance artist and engineer, known for paintings like "The Last Supper" and "Mona Lisa,” and for inventions like a flying machine. Updated: Aug 28, 2019 Photo: Getty Images (1452-1519) Who Was Leonardo da Vinci? Leonardo da Vinci was a Renaissance painter, sculptor, architect, inventor, military engineer and draftsman — the epitome of a true Renaissance man. Gifted with a curious mi
r, military engineer and draftsman — the epitome of a true Renaissance man. Gifted with a curious mind and a brilliant intellect, da Vinci studied the laws of science and nature, which greatly informed his work. His drawings, paintings and other works have influenced countless artists and engineers over the centuries. Early Life Da Vinci was born in a farmhouse outside the village of Anchiano in Tuscany, Italy (about 18 miles west of Florence) on April 15, 1452. Born out of wedlock to respected 
uscany, Italy (about 18 miles west of Florence) on April 15, 1452. Born out of wedlock to respected Florentine notary Ser Piero and a young peasant woman named Caterina, da Vinci was raised by his father and his stepmother. At the age of five, he moved to his father’s estate in nearby Vinci (the town from which his surname derives), where he lived with his uncle and grandparents. Education Young da Vinci received little formal education beyond basic reading, writing and mathematics instruction, 
a Vinci received little formal education beyond basic reading, writing and mathematics instruction, but his artistic talents were evident from an early age. Around the age of 14, da Vinci began a lengthy apprenticeship with the noted artist Andrea del Verrocchio in Florence. He learned a wide breadth of technical skills including metalworking, leather arts, carpentry, drawing, painting and sculpting. His earliest known dated work — a pen-and-ink drawing of a landscape in the Arno valley — was sk
ng. His earliest known dated work — a pen-and-ink drawing of a landscape in the Arno valley — was sketched in 1473. Early Works At the age of 20, da Vinci qualified for membership as a master artist in Florence’s Guild of Saint Luke and established his own workshop. However, he continued to collaborate with del Verrocchio for an additional five years. It is thought that del Verrocchio completed his “Baptism of Christ” around 1475 with the help of his student, who painted part of the background a
s “Baptism of Christ” around 1475 with the help of his student, who painted part of the background and the young angel holding the robe of Jesus. According to Lives of the Most Excellent Painters, Sculptors and Architects , written around 1550 by artist Giorgio Vasari, del Verrocchio was so humbled by the superior talent of his pupil that he never picked up a paintbrush again. (Most scholars, however, dismiss Vasari’s account as apocryphal.) In 1478, after leaving del Verrocchio’s studio, da Vin
ver, dismiss Vasari’s account as apocryphal.) In 1478, after leaving del Verrocchio’s studio, da Vinci received his first independent commission for an altarpiece to reside in a chapel inside Florence’s Palazzo Vecchio. Three years later the Augustinian monks of Florence’s San Donato a Scopeto tasked him to paint “Adoration of the Magi.” The young artist, however, would leave the city and abandon both commissions without ever completing them. Was Leonardo da Vinci Gay? Many historians believe th
both commissions without ever completing them. Was Leonardo da Vinci Gay? Many historians believe that da Vinci was a homosexual: Florentine court records from 1476 show that da Vinci and four other young men were charged with sodomy, a crime punishable by exile or death. After no witnesses showed up to testify against 24-year-old da Vinci, the charges were dropped, but his whereabouts went entirely undocumented for the following two years. Several other famous Florentine artists were also known
ly undocumented for the following two years. Several other famous Florentine artists were also known to have been homosexual, including Michelangelo , Donatello and Sandro Botticelli . Indeed, homosexuality was such a fact of artistic life in Renaissance Florence that the word "florenzer" became German slang for “gay.” Leonardo da Vinci: Paintings Although da Vinci is known for his artistic abilities, fewer than two dozen paintings attributed to him exist. One reason is that his interests were s
ies, fewer than two dozen paintings attributed to him exist. One reason is that his interests were so varied that he wasn’t a prolific painter. Da Vinci’s most famous works include the “Vitruvian Man,” “The Last Supper” and the “ Mona Lisa .” Vitruvian Man Art and science intersected perfectly in da Vinci’s sketch of “Vitruvian Man,” drawn in 1490, which depicted a nude male figure in two superimposed positions with his arms and legs apart inside both a square and a circle. The now-famous sketch
osed positions with his arms and legs apart inside both a square and a circle. The now-famous sketch represents da Vinci's study of proportion and symmetry, as well as his desire to relate man to the natural world. The Last Supper Around 1495, Ludovico Sforza, then the Duke of Milan, commissioned da Vinci to paint “The Last Supper” on the back wall of the dining hall inside the monastery of Milan’s Santa Maria delle Grazie. The masterpiece, which took approximately three years to complete, captu
s Santa Maria delle Grazie. The masterpiece, which took approximately three years to complete, captures the drama of the moment when Jesus informs the Twelve Apostles gathered for Passover dinner that one of them would soon betray him. The range of facial expressions and the body language of the figures around the table bring the masterful composition to life. The decision by da Vinci to paint with tempera and oil on dried plaster instead of painting a fresco on fresh plaster led to the quick de
h tempera and oil on dried plaster instead of painting a fresco on fresh plaster led to the quick deterioration and flaking of “The Last Supper.” Although an improper restoration caused further damage to the mural, it has now been stabilized using modern conservation techniques. Mona Lisa In 1503, da Vinci started working on what would become his most well-known painting — and arguably the most famous painting in the world —the “Mona Lisa.” The privately commissioned work is characterized by the
mous painting in the world —the “Mona Lisa.” The privately commissioned work is characterized by the enigmatic smile of the woman in the half-portrait, which derives from da Vinci’s sfumato technique. Adding to the allure of the “Mona Lisa” is the mystery surrounding the identity of the subject. Princess Isabella of Naples, an unnamed courtesan and da Vinci’s own mother have all been put forth as potential sitters for the masterpiece. It has even been speculated that the subject wasn’t a female 
potential sitters for the masterpiece. It has even been speculated that the subject wasn’t a female at all but da Vinci’s longtime apprentice Salai dressed in women’s clothing. Based on accounts from an early biographer, however, the "Mona Lisa" is a picture of Lisa del Giocondo, the wife of a wealthy Florentine silk merchant. The painting’s original Italian name — “La Gioconda” — supports the theory, but it’s far from certain. Some art historians believe the merchant commissioned the portrait t
ory, but it’s far from certain. Some art historians believe the merchant commissioned the portrait to celebrate the pending birth of the couple’s next child, which means the subject could have been pregnant at the time of the painting. If the Giocondo family did indeed commission the painting, they never received it. For da Vinci, the "Mona Lisa" was forever a work in progress, as it was his attempt at perfection, and he never parted with the painting. Today, the "Mona Lisa" hangs in the Louvre 
pt at perfection, and he never parted with the painting. Today, the "Mona Lisa" hangs in the Louvre Museum in Paris, France, secured behind bulletproof glass and regarded as a priceless national treasure seen by millions of visitors each year. Battle of Anghiari In 1503, da Vinci also started work on the "Battle of Anghiari," a mural commissioned for the council hall in the Palazzo Vecchio that was to be twice as large as "The Last Supper." He abandoned the "Battle of Anghiari" project after two
s to be twice as large as "The Last Supper." He abandoned the "Battle of Anghiari" project after two years when the mural began to deteriorate before he had a chance to finish it. Inventions In 1482, Florentine ruler Lorenzo de' Medici commissioned da Vinci to create a silver lyre and bring it as a peace gesture to Ludovico Sforza. After doing so, da Vinci lobbied Ludovico for a job and sent the future Duke of Milan a letter that barely mentioned his considerable talents as an artist and instead
uture Duke of Milan a letter that barely mentioned his considerable talents as an artist and instead touted his more marketable skills as a military engineer. Using his inventive mind, da Vinci sketched war machines such as a war chariot with scythe blades mounted on the sides, an armored tank propelled by two men cranking a shaft and even an enormous crossbow that required a small army of men to operate. The letter worked, and Ludovico brought da Vinci to Milan for a tenure that would last 17 y
operate. The letter worked, and Ludovico brought da Vinci to Milan for a tenure that would last 17 years. During his time in Milan, da Vinci was commissioned to work on numerous artistic projects as well, including “The Last Supper.” Da Vinci’s ability to be employed by the Sforza clan as an architecture and military engineering advisor as well as a painter and sculptor spoke to da Vinci’s keen intellect and curiosity about a wide variety of subjects. Flying Machine Always a man ahead of his tim
tellect and curiosity about a wide variety of subjects. Flying Machine Always a man ahead of his time, da Vinci appeared to prophesy the future with his sketches of devices that resemble a modern-day bicycle and a type of helicopter. Perhaps his most well-known invention is a flying machine, which is based on the physiology of a bat. These and other explorations into the mechanics of flight are found in da Vinci's Codex on the Flight of Birds, a study of avian aeronautics, which he began in 1505
und in da Vinci's Codex on the Flight of Birds, a study of avian aeronautics, which he began in 1505. Like many leaders of Renaissance humanism, da Vinci did not see a divide between science and art. He viewed the two as intertwined disciplines rather than separate ones. He believed studying science made him a better artist. In 1502 and 1503, da Vinci also briefly worked in Florence as a military engineer for Cesare Borgia, the illegitimate son of Pope Alexander VI and commander of the papal arm
engineer for Cesare Borgia, the illegitimate son of Pope Alexander VI and commander of the papal army. He traveled outside of Florence to survey military construction projects and sketch city plans and topographical maps. He designed plans, possibly with noted diplomat Niccolò Machiavelli , to divert the Arno River away from rival Pisa in order to deny its wartime enemy access to the sea. DOWNLOAD BIOGRAPHY'S LEONARDO DA VINCI FACT CARD Da Vinci’s Study of Anatomy and Science Da Vinci thought si
 BIOGRAPHY'S LEONARDO DA VINCI FACT CARD Da Vinci’s Study of Anatomy and Science Da Vinci thought sight was humankind’s most important sense and eyes the most important organ, and he stressed the importance of saper vedere, or “knowing how to see.” He believed in the accumulation of direct knowledge and facts through observation. “A good painter has two chief objects to paint — man and the intention of his soul,” da Vinci wrote. “The former is easy, the latter hard, for it must be expressed by g
on of his soul,” da Vinci wrote. “The former is easy, the latter hard, for it must be expressed by gestures and the movement of the limbs.” To more accurately depict those gestures and movements, da Vinci began to study anatomy seriously and dissect human and animal bodies during the 1480s. His drawings of a fetus in utero, the heart and vascular system, sex organs and other bone and muscular structures are some of the first on human record. In addition to his anatomical investigations, da Vinci
ctures are some of the first on human record. In addition to his anatomical investigations, da Vinci studied botany, geology, zoology, hydraulics, aeronautics and physics. He sketched his observations on loose sheets of papers and pads that he tucked inside his belt. Da Vinci placed the papers in notebooks and arranged them around four broad themes—painting, architecture, mechanics and human anatomy. He filled dozens of notebooks with finely drawn illustrations and scientific observations. Sculp
my. He filled dozens of notebooks with finely drawn illustrations and scientific observations. Sculptures Ludovico Sforza also tasked da Vinci with sculpting a 16-foot-tall bronze equestrian statue of his father and founder of the family dynasty, Francesco Sforza. With the help of apprentices and students in his workshop, da Vinci worked on the project on and off for more than a dozen years. Da Vinci sculpted a life-size clay model of the statue, but the project was put on hold when war with Fra
nci sculpted a life-size clay model of the statue, but the project was put on hold when war with France required bronze to be used for casting cannons, not sculptures. After French forces overran Milan in 1499 — and shot the clay model to pieces — da Vinci fled the city along with the duke and the Sforza family. Ironically, Gian Giacomo Trivulzio, who led the French forces that conquered Ludovico in 1499, followed in his foe’s footsteps and commissioned da Vinci to sculpt a grand equestrian stat
in 1499, followed in his foe’s footsteps and commissioned da Vinci to sculpt a grand equestrian statue, one that could be mounted on his tomb. After years of work and numerous sketches by da Vinci, Trivulzio decided to scale back the size of the statue, which was ultimately never finished. Final Years Da Vinci returned to Milan in 1506 to work for the very French rulers who had overtaken the city seven years earlier and forced him to flee. Among the students who joined his studio was young Milan
seven years earlier and forced him to flee. Among the students who joined his studio was young Milanese aristocrat Francesco Melzi, who would become da Vinci’s closest companion for the rest of his life. He did little painting during his second stint in Milan, however, and most of his time was instead dedicated to scientific studies. Amid political strife and the temporary expulsion of the French from Milan, da Vinci left the city and moved to Rome in 1513 along with Salai, Melzi and two studio 
from Milan, da Vinci left the city and moved to Rome in 1513 along with Salai, Melzi and two studio assistants. Giuliano de’ Medici, brother of newly installed Pope Leo X and son of his former patron, gave da Vinci a monthly stipend along with a suite of rooms at his residence inside the Vatican. His new patron, however, also gave da Vinci little work. Lacking large commissions, he devoted most of his time in Rome to mathematical studies and scientific exploration. After being present at a 1515 
 his time in Rome to mathematical studies and scientific exploration. After being present at a 1515 meeting between France’s King Francis I and Pope Leo X in Bologna, the new French monarch offered da Vinci the title “Premier Painter and Engineer and Architect to the King.” Along with Melzi, da Vinci departed for France, never to return. He lived in the Chateau de Cloux (now Clos Luce) near the king’s summer palace along the Loire River in Amboise. As in Rome, da Vinci did little painting during
ng’s summer palace along the Loire River in Amboise. As in Rome, da Vinci did little painting during his time in France. One of his last commissioned works was a mechanical lion that could walk and open its chest to reveal a bouquet of lilies. How Did Leonardo da Vinci Die? Da Vinci died of a probable stroke on May 2, 1519, at the age of 67. He continued work on his scientific studies until his death; his assistant, Melzi, became the principal heir and executor of his estate. The “Mona Lisa” was
ath; his assistant, Melzi, became the principal heir and executor of his estate. The “Mona Lisa” was bequeathed to Salai. For centuries after his death, thousands of pages from his private journals with notes, drawings, observations and scientific theories have surfaced and provided a fuller measure of the true "Renaissance man." Book and Movie Although much has been written about da Vinci over the years, Walter Isaacson explored new territory with an acclaimed 2017 biography, Leonardo da Vinci 
e years, Walter Isaacson explored new territory with an acclaimed 2017 biography, Leonardo da Vinci , which offers up details on what drove the artist's creations and inventions. The buzz surrounding the book carried into 2018, with the announcement that it had been optioned for a big-screen adaptation starring Leonardo DiCaprio . Salvator Mundi In 2017, the art world was sent buzzing with the news that the da Vinci painting "Salvator Mundi" had been sold at a Christie's auction to an undisclose
s that the da Vinci painting "Salvator Mundi" had been sold at a Christie's auction to an undisclosed buyer for a whopping $450.3 million. That amount dwarfed the previous record for an art work sold at an auction, the $179.4 million paid for “Women of Algiers" by Pablo Picasso in 2015. The sales figure was stunning in part because of the damaged condition of the oil-on-panel, which features Jesus Christ with his right hand raised in blessing and his left holding a crystal orb, and because not a
 Christ with his right hand raised in blessing and his left holding a crystal orb, and because not all experts believe it was rendered by da Vinci. However, Christie's had launched what one dealer called a "brilliant marketing campaign," which promoted the work as "the holy grail of our business" and "the last da Vinci." Prior to the sale, it was the only known painting by the old master still in a private collection. The Saudi Embassy stated that Prince Bader bin Abdullah bin Mohammed bin Farha
a private collection. The Saudi Embassy stated that Prince Bader bin Abdullah bin Mohammed bin Farhan al-Saud of Saudi Arabia had acted as an agent for the ministry of culture of Abu Dhabi, in the United Arab Emirates. Around that time, the newly-opened Louvre Abu Dhabi announced that the record-breaking artwork would be exhibited in its collection. Michelangelo "],[" Donatello "],[" Vincent van Gogh "]]" tml-render-layout="inline"> QUICK FACTS Name:                                             L
ogh "]]" tml-render-layout="inline"> QUICK FACTS Name:                                             Leonardo da Vinci Birth Year:                                             1452 Birth date: April 15,                                             1452 Birth City:                                             Vinci Birth Country:                                             Italy Gender: Male Best Known For: Leonardo da Vinci was a Renaissance artist and engineer, known for paintings like "The Last Sup
For: Leonardo da Vinci was a Renaissance artist and engineer, known for paintings like "The Last Supper" and "Mona Lisa,” and for inventions like a flying machine. Industries Art Science and Medicine Writing and Publishing Architecture Technology and Engineering Astrological Sign:                                             Aries Nacionalities Italian Interesting Facts Leonardo da Vinci was born out of wedlock to a respected Florentine notary and a young peasant woman. Da Vinci used tempera and 
ut of wedlock to a respected Florentine notary and a young peasant woman. Da Vinci used tempera and oil on dried plaster to paint "The Last Supper," which led to its quick deterioration and flaking. For da Vinci, the "Mona Lisa" was forever a work in progress, as it was his attempt at perfection, and he never parted with the painting. Death Year:                                             1519 Death date: May 2,                                             1519 Death City:                       
ath date: May 2,                                             1519 Death City:                                             Amboise Death Country:                                             France Fact Check We strive for accuracy and fairness.If you see something that doesn't look right, contact us ! CITATION INFORMATION Article Title:                                 Leonardo da Vinci Biography Author:                             Biography.com Editors Website Name:                               
thor:                             Biography.com Editors Website Name:                                 The Biography.com website Url:                             https://www.biography.com/artists/leonardo-da-vincii Access Date: Publisher:                             A&E; Television Networks Last Updated:                                 August                             28,                                 2019 Original Published Date:                                 April                         
        2019 Original Published Date:                                 April                             3,                                 2014 QUOTES Iron rusts from disuse, stagnant water loses its purity and in cold weather becomes frozen; even so does inaction sap the vigor of the mind. Nothing is hidden beneath the sun. Obstacles cannot bend me. Every obstacle yields to effort. We make our life by the death of others. Necessity is the mistress and guardian of nature. One ought not to desire
fe by the death of others. Necessity is the mistress and guardian of nature. One ought not to desire the impossible. He who neglects to punish evil sanctions the doing thereof. Darkness is the absence of light. Shadow is the diminution of light. The painter who draws by practice and judgment of the eye without the use of reason, is like the mirror that reproduces within itself all the objects which are set opposite to it without knowledge of the same. He who does not value life does not deserve 
h are set opposite to it without knowledge of the same. He who does not value life does not deserve it. Simplicity is the ultimate sophistication. Nothing strengthens authority so much as silence. Advertisement - Continue Reading Below Famous Painters Jean-Michel Basquiat Georgia O'Keeffe Banksy 11 Notable Artists from the Harlem Renaissance Advertisement - Continue Reading Below Fernando Botero Bob Ross Gustav Klimt Lili Elbe The Surreal Romance of Salvador and Gala Dalí Raphael Salvador Dalí M
ob Ross Gustav Klimt Lili Elbe The Surreal Romance of Salvador and Gala Dalí Raphael Salvador Dalí Margaret Keane Advertisement - Continue Reading Below About Biography.com Newsletter Contact Us Other Hearst Subscriptions A Part of Hearst Digital Media We may earn commission from links on this page, but we only recommend products we back. ©2024 Hearst Magazine Media, Inc. Site contains certain content that is owned A&E Television Networks, LLC. All Rights Reserved. Biography and associated logos
tent that is owned A&E Television Networks, LLC. All Rights Reserved. Biography and associated logos are trademarks of A+E Networks®protected in the US and other countries around the globe. Privacy Notice Terms of Use CA Notice at Collection DAA Industry Opt Out Your CA Privacy Rights/Shine the Light Cookies Choices
